

Chapter 22





Protocols—Polymorphic Functions




* * *



We have used the inspect function many times in this book. It returns a printable representation of any value as a binary (which is what we hard-core folks call strings).

But stop and think for a minute. Just how can Elixir, which doesn’t have objects, know what to call to do the conversion to a binary? You can pass inspect anything, and Elixir somehow makes sense of it.

It could be done using guard clauses:

def inspect(value) when is_atom(value), do: ...



def inspect(value) when is_binary(value), do: ...



: :





But there’s a better way.

Elixir has the concept of protocols. A protocol is a little like the behaviours we saw in the previous chapter in that it defines the functions that must be provided to achieve something. But a behaviour is internal to a module—the module implements the behaviour. Protocols are different—you can place a protocol’s implementation completely outside the module. This means you can extend modules’ functionality without having to add code to them—in fact, you can extend the functionality even if you don’t have the modules’ source code.





Defining a Protocol


Protocol definitions are very similar to basic module definitions. They can contain module- and function-level documentation (@moduledoc and @doc), and they will contain one or more function definitions. However, these functions will not have bodies—they are there simply to declare the interface that the protocol requires.

For example, here is the definition of the Inspect protocol:

defprotocol Inspect do



def inspect(thing, opts)



end





Just like a module, the protocol defines one or more functions. But we implement the code separately.





Implementing a Protocol


The defimpl macro lets you give Elixir the implementation of a protocol for one or more types. The code that follows is the implementation of the Inspect protocol for PIDs and references.

defimpl Inspect, for: PID do



def inspect(pid, _opts) do



"#PID" <> iolist_to_binary(pid_to_list(pid))



end



end





defimpl Inspect, for: Reference do



def inspect(ref, _opts) do



'#Ref' ++ rest = :erlang.ref_to_list(ref)



"#Reference" <> iolist_to_binary(rest)



end



end





Finally, the Kernel module implements inspect, which calls Inspect.inspect with its parameter. This means that when you call inspect(self), it becomes a call to Inspect.inspect(self). And because self is a PID, this in turn resolves to something like "#PID<0.25.0>".

Behind the scenes, defimpl puts the implementation for each protocol-and-type combination into a separate module. The protocol for Inspect for the PID type is in the module Inspect.PID. And because you can recompile modules, you can change the implementation of functions accessed via protocols.

iex> inspect self



"#PID<0.25.0>"



iex> defimpl Inspect, for: PID do



...> def inspect(pid, _) do



...> "#Process: " <> iolist_to_binary(:erlang.pid_to_list(pid)) <> "!!"



...> end



...> end



iex:3: redefining module Inspect.PID



{:module, Inspect.PID, <<70,79....



iex> inspect self



"#Process: <0.25.0>!!"





The Available Types


You can define implementations for one or more of the following types:

Any



Atom



BitString



Float



Function



Integer





List



PID



Port



Record



Reference



Tuple





The type BitString is used in place of Binary.

The type Any is a catchall, allowing you to match an implementation with any type. Just as with function definitions, you’ll want to put the implementations for specific types before an implementation for Any.

You can list multiple types on a single defimpl. For example, the following protocol can be called to determine if a type is a collection:

protocols/is_collection.exs

defprotocol Collection do



@fallback_to_any true



def is_collection?(value)



end





defimpl Collection, for: [List, Tuple, BitString] do



def is_collection?(_), do: true



end





defimpl Collection, for: Any do



def is_collection?(_), do: false



end





Enum.each [ 1, 1.0, [1,2], {1,2}, HashDict.new, "cat" ], fn value ->



IO.puts "#{inspect value}: #{Collection.is_collection?(value)}"



end





We write defimpl stanzas for the three collection types: List, Tuple, and BitString. But what about the other types? To handle those, we use the special type Any in a second defimpl. If we use Any, though, we also have to add an annotation to the protocol definition. Thats what the @fallback_to_any line does.

This produces

1: false



1.0: false



[1,2]: true



{1,2}: true



#HashDict<[]>: true



"cat": true





Your Turn


Exercise: Protocols-1

A basic Caesar cypher consists of shifting the letters in a message by a fixed offset. For an offset of 1, for example, a will become b, b will become c, and z will become a. If the offset is 13, we have the ROT13 algorithm.

Lists and binaries can both be stringlike. Write a Caesar protocol that applies to both. It would include two functions: encrypt(string, shift) and rot13(string).



Exercise: Protocols-2

Using a list of words in your language, write a program to look for words where the result of calling rot13(word) is also a word in the list. (For various English word lists, look at http://wordlist.sourceforge.net/. The SCOWL collection looks promising, as it already has words divided by size.)





Protocols and Structs


Elixir doesn’t have classes, but (perhaps surprisingly) it does have user-defined types. It pulls off this magic using structs and a few conventions.

Let’s play with a simple struct. Here’s the definition:

protocols/basic.exs

defmodule Blob do



defstruct content: nil



end





And here we use it in iex:

iex> c "basic.exs"



[Blob]



iex> b = %Blob{content: 123}



%Blob{content: 123}



iex> inspect b



"%Blob{content: 123}"





It looks for all the world as if we’ve created some new type, the blob. But that’s only because Elixir is hiding something from us. By default, inspect recognizes structs. If we turn this off using the structs: false option, inspect reveals the true nature of our blob value:

iex> inspect b, structs: false



"%{__struct__: Blob, content: 123}"





A struct value is actually just a map with the key __struct__ referencing the struct’s module (Blob in this case) and the remaining elements containing the keys and values for this instance. The inspect implementation for maps checks for this—if you ask it to inspect a map containing a key __struct__ that references a module, it displays it as a struct.

Many built-in types in Elixir are represented as structs internally. It’s instructive to try creating values and inspecting them with structs: false.





Built-in Protocols: Access


Let’s define a type Bitmap that lets us access the individual bits in a number’s binary representation. To do this, we’ll create a struct that contains a single field, value.

protocols/bitmap.exs

defmodule Bitmap do



defstruct value: 0



end





The built-in Access protocol defines the [] operator for accessing members of a collection. We can use this to access the bits in our value, so accessing a bitmap value with value[0] would return the least-significant bit. The implementation that follows uses the Bitwise module that comes with Elixir—this gives us the &&& and <<< bitwise and and shift operators. (Note that the Access protocol may be removed from future versions of Elixir.)

protocols/bitmap_access.exs

defmodule Bitmap do



defstruct value: 0





defimpl Access do



use Bitwise



def get(%Bitmap{value: value}, bit) do



if (value &&& (1 <<< bit)) == 0, do: 0, else: 1



end



def get_and_update(bitmap = %Bitmap{value: value}, bit, accessor_fn) do



old_value = get(bitmap, bit)



new_value = accessor_fn.(old_value)



value = (value &&& bnot( 1 <<< bit )) ||| (new_value <<< bit)



%Bitmap{value: value}



end



end



end





Let’s try it:

$ iex bitmap_access.exs



iex> fifty = %Bitmap{value: 50}



%Bitmap{value: 50}



iex> [5,4,3,2,1,0] |> Enum.each(fn bit -> IO.puts fifty[bit] end)



1



1



0



0



1



0



:ok



iex> get_and_update_in fifty[1], fn bit -> 1 - bit end



%Bitmap{value: 48}





When we write fifty[bit] on the second line of our code, we’re actually invoking the Access protocol. The handler for this sees that its value type is a map and that the map has a __struct__ key. It looks up the corresponding value and finds the Bitmap module. It then looks for a module called Bitmap.Access and invokes its access function, passing in the original value and the parameter between the square brackets. (Don’t tell anyone, but this is quite like method dispatch in an object-oriented language.) Similarly, get_and_update_in ends up calling our get_and_update function.





Built-in Protocols: Enumerable


The Enumerable protocol is the basis of all the functions in the Enum module—any type implementing it can be used as a collection argument to Enum functions.

The protocol is defined in terms of three functions:

defprotocol Enumerable do



def count(collection)



def member?(collection, value)



def reduce(collection, acc, fun)



end





count returns the number of elements in the collection, member? is truthy if the collection contains value, and reduce applies the given function to successive values in the collection and the accumulator; the value it reduces becomes the next accumulator. Perhaps surprisingly, all the Enum functions can be defined in terms of these three.

However, life isn’t quite that simple. Maybe you’re using Enum.find to find a value in a large collection. Once you’ve found it, you want to halt the iteration—continuing is pointless. Similarly, you may want to suspend an iteration and resume it sometime later. These two features become particularly important when we talk about streams, which let you enumerate a collection lazily.

Let’s look at implementing the count part of the enumerable protocol. We return the number of bits required to represent the value.

protocols/bitmap_enumerable.exs

defmodule Bitmap do



defstruct value: 0





defimpl Enumerable do



import :math, only: [log: 1]



def count(%Bitmap{value: value}) do



{ :ok, trunc(log(abs(value))/log(2)) + 1 }



end



end



end





fifty = %Bitmap{value: 50}





IO.puts Enum.count fifty # => 6





Our count method returns a tuple containing :ok and the actual count. If our collection was not countable (perhaps it represents data coming over a network connection), we would return {:error, __MODULE__}.

I’ve decided the member? function should return true if the number you pass it is greater than or equal to zero and less than the number of bits in our value. Again the implementation returns a tuple:

protocols/bitmap_enumerable.exs

def member?(value, bit_number) do



{ :ok, 0 <= bit_number && bit_number < Enum.count(value) }



end





IO.puts Enum.member? fifty, 4 # => true



IO.puts Enum.member? fifty, 6 # => false





However, the meaning of the :ok part is slightly different. You’ll normally return {:ok, boolean} for all collections where you know the size, and {:error, __MODULE__} otherwise. In this way, it is like count. However, the reason you do it is different. If you return :ok it means you have a fast way of determining membership. If you return :error, you’re saying you don’t. In this case, the enumerable code will simply perform a linear search.

Finally, we get to reduce. First, remember the general form of the reduce function:

reduce(enumerable, accumulator, function)

Reduce takes each item in turn from enumerable, passing it and the current value of the accumulator to the function. The value the function returns becomes the accumulator’s next value.

The reduce function we implement for the Enumerable protocol is the same. But it has some additional conventions associated with it. These conventions are used to manage the early halting and suspension when iterating over streams.

The first convention is that the accumulator value is passed as the second element of a tuple. The first element is a verb telling our reduce function what to do:

:cont



Continue processing.





:halt



Terminate processing.





:suspend



Temporarily suspend processing.





The second convention is that the value returned by reduce is another tuple. Again, the second element is the updated accumulator value. The first element passed back the state of the enumerator:

:done



This is the final value—we’ve reached the end of the enumerable.





:halted



We terminated the enumeration because we were passed :halt.





:suspended



Response to a suspend.





The suspended case is special. Rather than return a new accumulator, we return a function that represents the current state of the enumeration. The library can call this function to kick off the enumeration again.

Once we implement this, our bitmap can participate in all the features of the Enum module:

protocols/bitmap_enumerable.exs

def reduce(bitmap, {:cont, acc}, fun) do



bit_count = Enum.count(bitmap)



_reduce({bitmap, bit_count}, { :cont, acc }, fun)



end





defp _reduce({_bitmap, -1}, { :cont, acc }, _fun), do: { :done, acc }





defp _reduce({bitmap, bit_number}, { :cont, acc }, fun) do



_reduce({bitmap, bit_number-1}, fun.(bitmap[bit_number], acc), fun)



end





defp _reduce({_bitmap, _bit_number}, { :halt, acc }, _fun), do: { :halted, acc }





defp _reduce({bitmap, bit_number}, { :suspend, acc }, fun),



do: { :suspended, acc, &_reduce({bitmap, bit_number}, &1, fun), fun }





IO.inspect Enum.reverse fifty # => [0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0]



IO.inspect Enum.join fifty, ":" # => "0:1:1:0:0:1:0"





If you think this is complicated—well, you’re correct. It is. In part that’s because these conventions allow all enumerable values to be used both eagerly and lazily. And when you’re dealing with big (or even infinite) collections, this is a big deal.





Built-in Protocols: String.Chars


The String.Chars protocol is used to convert a value to a string (binary). It consists of a single method, to_string. This is the protocol used for string interpolation:

protocols/bitmap_string.exs

defmodule Bitmap do



defstruct value: 0





defimpl String.Chars do



def to_string(value), do: Enum.join(value, "")



end



end





fifty = %Bitmap{value: 50}





IO.puts "Fifty in bits is #{fifty}" # => Fifty in bits is 0110010





Built-in Protocols: Inspect


This is the protocol that is used to inspect a value. The rule is simple—if you can return a representation that is a valid Elixir literal, do so. Otherwise, prefix the representation with #Typename.

We could just delegate the inspect function to the Elixir default. For our value 50, this would be %Bitmap{value: 50}. But let’s override it. We need to implement the inspect function. It takes a value and some options.

protocols/bitmap_inspect.exs

defmodule Bitmap do



defstruct value: 0





defimpl Inspect do



def inspect(%Bitmap{value: value}, _opts) do



"%Bitmap{#{value}=#{as_binary(value)}}"



end



defp as_binary(value) do



to_string(:io_lib.format("~.2B", [value]))



end



end



end





fifty = %Bitmap{value: 50}





IO.inspect fifty # => %Bitmap{50=0110010}



IO.inspect fifty, structs: false # => %{__struct__: Bitmap, value: 50}





Run this, and you’ll see

#Bitmap[50=0110010]



{Bitmap,50}





There’s a wrinkle here. If you pass structs: true to IO.inspect (or Kernel.inspect), it never calls our inspect function. Instead, it formats it as a tuple.

The formatting of our bitmap leaves a little to be desired for large numbers:

iex> Bitmap.new(value: 12345678901234567890)



%Bitmap{12345678901234567890=0101010110101010010101001100011001110



1011000111110000101011010010}





The output was all on one line, and was wrapped by the console. To fix this, we use a feature called algebra documents. An algebra document is a tree structure that represents some data you’d like to pretty-print.[28] Your job is to create the structure based on the data you want to inspect, and Elixir will then find a nice way to display it.

In our case, I’d like the bitmap values to display on a single line if they fit, and I’d like them to break intelligently onto multiple lines if not.

We do this by having our inspect function return an algebra document rather than a string. In that document, we indicate places where breaks are allowed (but not required) and we show how the nesting works:

protocols/bitmap_algebra.exs

defmodule Bitmap do



defstruct value: 0





defimpl Inspect, for: Bitmap do



import Inspect.Algebra



def inspect(%Bitmap{value: value}, _opts) do



concat([



nest(



concat([



"%Bitmap{",



break(""),



nest(concat([to_string(value),



"=",



break(""),



as_binary(value)]),



2),



]), 2),



break(""),



"}"])



end



defp as_binary(value) do



to_string(:io_lib.format("~.2B", [value]))



end



end



end





big_bitmap = %Bitmap{value: 12345678901234567890}





IO.inspect big_bitmap



IO.inspect big_bitmap, structs: false





We get this output:

iex> %Bitmap{value: 12345}



%Bitmap{12345=011000000111001}



iex> %Bitmap{value: 123456789123456789}



%Bitmap{



123456789123456789=



0110110110100110110100101110101100110100000101111100010101



}





For more information, see the documentation for Inspect.Algebra.





Protocols Are Polymorphism


When you want to write a function that behaves differently depending on the type of its arguments, you’re looking at a polymorphic function. Elixir protocols give you a tidy and controlled way to implement this. Whether you’re integrating your types into the existing Elixir library or creating a new library with a flexible interface, protocols let you package the behaviour in a well-documented and disciplined way.

And with that, we’re almost done. But when you write about a language, there are always little details that don’t seem to fit anywhere. That’s why the next chapter is full of odds and ends.





Your Turn


Exercise: Protocols-3

Collections that implement the Enumerable protocol define count, member?, and reduce functions. The Enum module uses these to implement methods such as each, filter, and map.

Implement your own versions of each, filter, and map in terms of reduce.



Exercise: Protocols-4

In many cases, inspect will return a valid Elixir literal for the value being inspected. Update the inspect function for structs so that it returns valid Elixir code to construct a new struct equal to the value being inspected.





Footnotes


[28]

http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.34.2200



