


Chapter 20





Macros and Code Evaluation




* * *



Have you ever felt frustrated that a language didn’t have just the right feature for some code you were writing? Or have you found yourself repeating chunks of code that weren’t amenable to factoring into functions? Or have you just wished you could program closer to your problem domain?

If so, then you’ll love this chapter.

But, before we get into the details, here’s a warning: macros can easily make your code harder to understand, because you’re essentially rewriting parts of the language. For that reason, never use a macro when you could use a function. Let’s repeat that:



* * *





Recipe 1: Never use a macro when you can use a function.




* * *



In fact, you’ll probably not write a macro in regular application code. But if you’re writing a library and want to use some of the other metaprogramming techniques that we show in later chapters, you’ll need to know how macros work.





Implementing an if Statement


Let’s imagine Elixir didn’t have an if statement—all it has is case. Although we’re prepared to abandon our old friend the while loop, not having an if statement is just too much to bear, so we set about implementing one.

We’ll want to call it using something like

myif condition do



evaluate if true



else



evaluate if false



end





We know that blocks in Elixir are converted into keyword parameters, so this is equivalent to

myif condition,



do: evaluate if true,



else: evaluate if false





Here’s a sample call:

My.myif 1==2, do: (IO.puts "1 == 2"), else: (IO.puts "1 != 2")





Let’s try to implement myif as a function:

defmodule My do



def myif(condition, clauses) do



do_clause = Keyword.get(clauses, :do, nil)



else_clause = Keyword.get(clauses, :else, nil)





case condition do



val when val in [false, nil]



-> else_clause



_otherwise



-> do_clause



end



end



end





When we run it, we’re (mildly) surprised to get the following output:

iex> My.myif 1==2, do: (IO.puts "1 == 2"), else: (IO.puts "1 != 2")



1 == 2



1 != 2



:ok





When we call the myif function, Elixir has to evaluate all of its parameters before passing them in. So both the do: and else: clauses are evaluated, and we see their output. Because IO.puts returns :ok on success, what actually gets passed to myif is

myif 1==2, do: :ok, else: :ok





This is why the final return value is :ok.

Clearly we need a way of delaying the execution of these clauses. And this is where macros come in. But before we implement our myif macro, we need a little background.





Macros Inject Code


Let’s pretend we’re the Elixir compiler. We read a module’s source top to bottom and generate a representation of the code we find. That representation is a nested Elixir tuple.

If we want to support macros, we need a way to tell the compiler that we’d like to manipulate a part of that tuple. We do that using defmacro, quote, and unquote.

In the same way that def defines a function, defmacro defines a macro. You’ll see what that looks like shortly. However, the real magic starts not when we define a macro, but when we use one.

When we pass parameters to a macro, Elixir doesn’t evaluate them. Instead, it passes them as tuples representing their code. We can examine this behavior using a simple macro definition that prints out its parameter.

macros/dumper.exs

defmodule My do



defmacro macro(param) do



IO.inspect param



end



end





defmodule Test do



require My





# These values represent themselves



My.macro :atom #=> :atom



My.macro 1 #=> 1



My.macro 1.0 #=> 1.0



My.macro [1,2,3] #=> [1,2,3]



My.macro "binaries" #=> "binaries"



My.macro { 1, 2 } #=> {1,2}



My.macro do: 1 #=> [do: 1]



My.macro do #=> [do: 1]



1



end





# And these are represented by 3-element tuples



My.macro { 1,2,3,4,5 } #=> {:"{}",[line: 20],[1,2,3,4,5]}





My.macro do: ( a = 1; a+a ) #=>



# [do:



# {:__block__,[],



# [{:=,[line: 22],[{:a,[line: 22],nil},1]},



# {:+,[line: 22],[{:a,[line: 22],nil},{:a,[line: 22],nil}]}]}]





My.macro do #=> [do: {:+,[line: 24],[1,2]}, else: {:+,[line: 26],[3,4]}]



1+2



else



3+4



end



end





This shows us that atoms, numbers, lists (including keyword lists), binaries, and tuples with two elements are represented internally as themselves. All other Elixir code is represented by a three-element tuple. Right now, the internals of that representation aren’t important.





Load Order


You may be wondering about the structure of the preceding code. We put the macro definition in one module, and the usage of that macro in another. And that second module included a require call.

Macros are expanded before a program executes, so the macro defined in one module must be available as Elixir is compiling another module that uses those macros. The require function tells Elixir to ensure the named module is compiled before the current one. In practice it is used to make the macros defined in one module available in another.

But the reason for the two modules is less clear. It has to do with the fact that Elixir first compiles source files and then runs them.

If we have one module per source file and we reference a module in file A from file B, Elixir will load the module from A, and everything just works. But if we have a module and the code that uses it in the same file, and the module is defined in the same scope in which we use it, Elixir will not know to load the module’s code. We’ll get this error:

** (CompileError)



.../dumper.ex:7:



module My is not loaded but was defined. This happens because you



are trying to use a module in the same context it is defined. Try



defining the module outside the context that requires it.





By placing the code that uses module My in a separate module, we force My to load.





The Quote Function


We’ve seen that when we pass parameters to a macro they are not evaluated. The language comes with a function, quote, that also forces code to remain in its unevaluated form. quote takes a block and returns the internal representation of that block. We can play with it in iex:

iex> quote do: :atom



:atom



iex> quote do: 1



1



iex> quote do: 1.0



1.0



iex> quote do: [1,2,3]



[1,2,3]



iex> quote do: "binaries"



"binaries"



iex> quote do: {1,2}



{1,2}



iex> quote do: [do: 1]



[do: 1]



iex> quote do: {1,2,3,4,5}



{:"{}",[],[1,2,3,4,5]}



iex> quote do: (a = 1; a + a)



{:__block__, [],



[{:=, [], [{:a, [], Elixir}, 1]},



{:+, [context: Elixir, import: Kernel],



[{:a, [], Elixir}, {:a, [], Elixir}]}]}



iex> quote do: [ do: 1 + 2, else: 3 + 4]



[do: {:+, [context: Elixir, import: Kernel], [1, 2]},



else: {:+, [context: Elixir, import: Kernel], [3, 4]}]





There’s another way to think about quote. When we write "abc", we create a binary containing a string. The double quotes say “interpret what follows as a string of characters and return the appropriate representation.”

quote is the same: it says “interpret the content of the block that follows as code, and return the internal representation.”





Using the Representation As Code


When we extract the internal representation of some code (either via a macro parameter or using quote), we stop Elixir from adding it automatically to the tuples of code it is building during compilation—we’ve effectively created a free-standing island of code. How do we inject that code back into our program’s internal representation?

There are two ways.

The first is our old friend the macro. Just like with a function, the value a macro returns is the last expression evaluated in that macro. That expression is expected to be a fragment of code in Elixir’s internal representation. But Elixir does not return this representation to the code that invoked the macro. Instead it injects the code back into the internal representation of our program and returns to the caller the result of executing that code. But that execution takes place only if needed.

We can demonstrate this in two steps. First, here’s a macro that simply returns its parameter (after printing it out). The code we give it when we invoke the macro is passed as an internal representation, and when the macro returns that code, that representation is injected back into the compile tree.

macros/eg.exs

defmodule My do



defmacro macro(code) do



IO.inspect code



code



end



end





defmodule Test do



require My



My.macro(IO.puts("hello"))



end





When we run this, we see

{{:.,[line: 11],[{:__aliases__,[line: 11],[:IO]},:puts]},



[line: 11],["hello"]}



hello





Now we’ll change that file to return a different piece of code. We use quote to generate the internal form:

macros/eg1.exs

defmodule My do



defmacro macro(code) do



IO.inspect code



quote do: IO.puts "Different code"



end



end





defmodule Test do



require My



My.macro(IO.puts("hello"))



end





This generates

{{:.,[line: 11],[{:__aliases__,[line: 11],[:IO]},:puts]},



[line: 11],["hello"]}



Different code





Even though we passed IO.puts("hello") as a parameter, it was never executed. Instead, the code fragment we returned using quote was.

Before we can write our version of if, we need one more trick—the ability to substitute existing code into a quoted block. There are two ways of doing this: by using the unquote function and with bindings.





The Unquote Function


Let’s get two things out of the way. First, we can use unquote only inside a quote block. Second, unquote is a silly name. It should really be something like inject_code_fragment.

Let’s see why we need this. Here’s a simple macro that tries to output the result of evaluating the code we pass it:

defmacro macro(code) do



quote do



IO.inspect(code)



end



end





Unfortunately, when we run it, it reports an error:

** (CompileError).../eg2.ex:11: function code/0 undefined





Inside the quote block, Elixir is just parsing regular code, so the name code is inserted literally into the code fragment it returns. But we don’t want that. We want Elixir to insert the evaluation of the code we pass in. And that’s where we use unquote. It temporarily turns off quoting and simply injects a code fragment into the sequence of code being returned by quote.

defmodule My do



defmacro macro(code) do



quote do



IO.inspect(unquote(code))



end



end



end





Inside the quote block, Elixir is busy parsing the code and generating its internal representation. But when it hits the unquote, it stops parsing and simply copies the code parameter into the generated code. After unquote, it goes back to regular parsing.

There’s another way of thinking about this. Using unquote inside a quote is a way of deferring the execution of the unquoted code. It doesn’t run when the quote block is parsed. Instead it runs when the code generated by the quote block is executed.

Or, we can think in terms of our quote-as-string-literal analogy. In this case, we can make a (slightly tenuous) case that unquote is a little like the interpolation we can do in strings. When we write "sum=#{1+2}", Elixir evaluates 1+2 and interpolates the result into the quoted string. When we write quote do: def unquote(name) do end, Elixir interpolates the contents of name into the code representation it is building as part of the list.





Expanding a List—unquote_splicing


Consider this code:

iex> Code.eval_quoted(quote do: [1,2,unquote([3,4])])



{[1,2,[3,4]],[]}





The list [3,4] is inserted, as a list, into the overall quoted list, resulting in [1,2,[3,4]].

If we instead wanted to insert just the elements of the list, we could use unquote_splicing.

iex> Code.eval_quoted(quote do: [1,2,unquote_splicing([3,4])])



{[1,2,3,4],[]}





Remembering that single-quoted strings are lists of characters, this means we can write

iex> Code.eval_quoted(quote do: [?a, ?= ,unquote_splicing('1234')])



{'a=1234',[]}





Back to Our myif Macro


We now have everything we need to implement an if macro.

macros/myif.ex

defmodule My do



defmacro if(condition, clauses) do



do_clause = Keyword.get(clauses, :do, nil)



else_clause = Keyword.get(clauses, :else, nil)



quote do



case unquote(condition) do



val when val in [false, nil] -> unquote(else_clause)



_ -> unquote(do_clause)



end



end



end



end





defmodule Test do



require My



My.if 1==2 do



IO.puts "1 == 2"



else



IO.puts "1 != 2"



end



end





It’s worth studying this code.

The if macro receives a condition and a keyword list. The condition and any entries in the keyword list are passed as code fragments.

The macro extracts the do: and/or else: clauses from that list. It is then ready to generate the code for our if statement, so it opens a quote block. That block contains an Elixir case expression. This case expression has to evaluate the condition that is passed in, so it uses unquote to inject that condition’s code as its parameter.

When Elixir executes this case statement, it evaluates the condition. At that point, case will match the first clause if the result is nil or false; otherwise it matches the second clause. When a clause matches (and only then), we want to execute the code that was passed in either the do: or else: values in the keyword list, so we use unquote again to inject that code into the case.





Your Turn


Exercise: MacrosAndCodeEvaluation-1

Write a macro called myunless that implements the standard unless functionality. You’re allowed to use the regular if expression in it.



Exercise: MacrosAndCodeEvaluation-2

Write a macro called times_n that takes a single numeric argument. It should define a function called times_n in the caller’s module that itself takes a single argument, and that multiplies that argument by n. So, calling times_n(3) should create a function called times_3, and calling times_3(4) should return 12. Here’s an example of it in use: defmodule Test do



require Times



Times.times_n(3)



Times.times_n(4)



end





IO.puts Test.times_3(4) #=> 12



IO.puts Test.times_4(5) #=> 20





Using Bindings to Inject Values


Remember that there are two ways of injecting values into quoted blocks. One is unquote. The other is to use a binding. However, the two have different uses and different semantics.

A binding is simply a keyword list of variable names and their values. When we pass a binding to quote the variables are set inside the body of that quote.

This is useful because macros are executed at compile time. This means they don’t have access to values that are calculated at runtime.

Here’s an example. The intent is to have a macro that defines a function that returns its own name:

defmacro mydef(name) do



quote do



def unquote(name)(), do: unquote(name)



end



end





We try this out using something like mydef(:some_name). Sure enough, that defines a function that, when called, returns :some_name.

Buoyed by our success, we try something more ambitious:

macros/macro_no_binding.exs

defmodule My do



defmacro mydef(name) do



quote do



def unquote(name)(), do: unquote(name)



end



end



end





defmodule Test do



require My



[ :fred, :bert ] |> Enum.each(&My.mydef(&1))



end





IO.puts Test.fred





And we’re rewarded with this:

macro_no_binding.exs:12: invalid syntax in def _@1()





At the time the macro is called, the each loop hasn’t yet executed, so we have no valid name to pass it. This is where bindings come in:

macros/macro_binding.exs

defmodule My do



defmacro mydef(name) do



quote bind_quoted: [name: name] do



def unquote(name)(), do: unquote(name)



end



end



end





defmodule Test do



require My



[ :fred, :bert ] |> Enum.each(&My.mydef(&1))



end





IO.puts Test.fred #=> fred





Two things happen here. First, the binding makes the current value of name available inside the body of the quoted block. Second, the presence of the bind_quoted: option automatically defers the execution of the unquote calls in the body. This way, the methods are defined at runtime.

As its name implies, bind_quoted takes a quoted code fragment. Simple things such as tuples are the same as normal and quoted code, but for most values you probably want to quote them or use Macro.escape to ensure that your code fragment will be interpreted correctly.





Macros Are Hygienic


It is tempting to think of macros as some kind of textual substitution—a macro’s body is expanded as text and then compiled at the point of call. But that’s not the case. Consider this example:

macros/hygiene.ex

defmodule Scope do



defmacro update_local(val) do



local = "some value"



result = quote do



local = unquote(val)



IO.puts "End of macro body, local = #{local}"



end



IO.puts "In macro definition, local = #{local}"



result



end



end





defmodule Test do



require Scope





local = 123



Scope.update_local("cat")



IO.puts "On return, local = #{local}"



end





Here’s the result of running that code:

In macro definition, local = some value



End of macro body, local = cat



On return, local = 123





If the macro body was just substituted in at the point of call, both it and the module Test would share the same scope, and the macro would overwrite the variable local, so we’d see

In macro definition, local = some value



End of macro body, local = cat



On return, local = cat





But that isn’t what happens. Instead the macro definition has both its own scope and a scope during execution of the quoted macro body. Both are distinct to the scope within the Test module. The upshot is that macros will not clobber each other’s variables or the variables of modules and functions that use them.

The import and alias functions are also locally scoped. See the documentation for quote for a full description. This also describes how to turn off hygiene for variables and how to control the stack trace’s format if things go wrong while executing a macro.





Other Ways to Run Code Fragments


We can use the function Code.eval_quoted to evaluate code fragments, such as those returned by quote.

iex> fragment = quote do: IO.puts("hello")



{{:.,[],[{:__aliases__,[alias: false],[:IO]},:puts]},[],["hello"]}



iex> Code.eval_quoted fragment



hello



{:ok,[]}





By default, the quoted fragment is hygienic, and so does not have access to variables outside its scope. Using var!(:name), we can disable this feature and allow a quoted block to access variables in the containing scope. In this case, we pass the binding to eval_quoted as a keyword list.

iex> fragment = quote do: IO.puts(var!(a))



{{:., [], [{:__aliases__, [alias: false], [:IO]}, :puts]}, [],



[{:var!, [context: Elixir, import: Kernel], [{:a, [], Elixir}]}]}



iex> Code.eval_quoted fragment, [a: "cat"]



cat



{:ok,[a: "cat"]}





Code.string_to_quoted converts a string containing code to its quoted form, and Macro.to_string converts a code fragment back into a string.

iex> fragment = Code.string_to_quoted("defmodule A do def b(c) do c+1 end end")



{:ok,{:defmodule,[line: 1],[{:__aliases__,[line: 1],[:A]},



[do: {:def,[line: 1],[{:b,[line: 1],[{:c,[line: 1],nil}]},



[do: {:+,[line: 1],[{:c,[line: 1],nil},1]}]]}]]}}



iex> Macro.to_string(fragment)



"{:ok, defmodule(A) do\n def(b(c)) do\n c + 1\n end\nend}"





We can also evaluate a string directly using Code.eval_string.

iex> Code.eval_string("[a, a*b, c]", [a: 2, b: 3, c: 4])



{[2,6,4],[a: 2, b: 3, c: 4]}





Macros and Operators


(This is definitely dangerous ground.)

We can override the unary and binary operators in Elixir using macros. To do so, we need to remove any existing definition first.

For example, the operator + (which adds two numbers) is defined in the Kernel module. To remove the Kernel definition and substitute our own, we’d need to do something like the following (which redefines addition to concatenate the string representation of the left and right arguments).

macros/operators.ex

defmodule Operators do



defmacro a + b do



quote do



to_string(unquote(a)) <> to_string(unquote(b))



end



end



end





defmodule Test do



IO.puts(123 + 456) #=> "579"



import Kernel, except: [+: 2]



import Operators



IO.puts(123 + 456) #=> "123456"



end





IO.puts(123 + 456) #=> "579"





Note that the macro’s definition is lexically scoped—the + operator is overridden from the point when we import the Operators module through the end of the module that imports it. We could also have done the import inside a single method, and the scoping would be just that method.

The Macro module has two functions that list the unary and binary operators:

iex> require Macro



nil



iex> Macro.binary_ops



[:===, :!==, :==, :!=, :<=, :>=, :&&, :||, :<>, :++, :--, :\\, :::, :<-, :..,



:|>, :=~, :<, :>, :->, :+, :-, :*, :/, :=, :|, :., :and, :or, :when, :in,



:~>>, :<<~, :~>, :<~, :<~>, :<|>, :<<<, :>>>, :|||, :&&&, :^^^, :~~~]



iex> Macro.unary_ops



[:!, :@, :^, :not, :+, :-, :~~~, :&]





Digging Deeper


The Code and Macro modules contain the functions that manipulate the internal representation of code.

Check the source of the Kernel module for a list of the majority of the operator macros, along with macros for things such as def, defmodule, alias, and so on. If we look at the source code, we’ll see the calling sequence for these. However, many of the bodies will be absent, as the macros are defined within the Elixir source.





Digging Ridiculously Deep


Here’s the internal representation of a simple expression:

iex(1)> quote do: 1 + 2



{:+, [context: Elixir, import: Kernel], [1, 2]}





It’s just a three-element tuple. In this particular case, the first element is the function (or macro), the second is housekeeping metadata, and the third is the arguments.

We know we can evaluate this code fragment using eval_quoted, and we can save typing by leaving off the metadata:

iex> Code.eval_quoted {:+, [], [1,2]}



{3,[]}





And now we can start to see the promise (and danger) of a homoiconic language. Because code is just tuples and because we can manipulate those tuples, we rewrite the definitions of existing functions. We can create new code on the fly. And we can do it in a safe way because we can control the scope of both the changes and the access to variables.

Next we’ll look at protocols, a way of adding functionality to built-in code and of integrating our code into other people’s modules.





Your Turn


Exercise: MacrosAndCodeEvaluation-3

The Elixir test framework, ExUnit, uses some clever code-quoting tricks. For example, if you assert assert 5 < 4





You’ll get the error “expected 5 to be less than 4.”

The Elixir source code is on GitHub (at https://github.com/elixir-lang/elixir). The implementation of this is in the file elixir/lib/ex_unit/lib/ex_unit/assertions.ex. Spend some time reading this file, and work out how it implements this trick.

(Hard) Once you’ve done that, see if you can use the same technique to implement a function that takes an arbitrary arithmetic expression and returns a natural language version. explain do: 2 + 3 * 4



#=> multiply 3 and 4, then add 2



