
## 第二十三章 炫酷


Elixir is packed with features that make coding a joy. This chapter contains a smattering of them.


Writing Your Own Sigils


You know by now that you can create strings and regular-expression literals using sigils:

string = ~s{now is the time}



regex = ~r{..h..}


Have you ever wished you could extend these sigils to add your own specific literal types? You can.

When you write a sigil such as ~s{...}, Elixir converts it into a call to the function sigil_s. It passes the function two values. The first is the string between the delimiters. The second is a list containing any lowercase letters that immediately follow the closing delimiter. (This second parameter is used to pick up any options you pass to a regex literal, such as ~r/cat/if.)

Here’s the implementation of a sigil ~l that takes a multiline string and returns a list containing each line as a separate string. We know that ~l… is converted into a call to sigil_l, so we just write a simple function in the LineSigil module.

odds/line_sigil.exs

defmodule LineSigil do



@doc """



Implement the `~l` sigil, which takes a string containing



multiple lines and returns a list of those lines.





## Example usage





iex> import LineSigil



nil



iex> ~l"""



...> one



...> two



...> three



...> """



["one","two","three"]



"""



def sigil_l(lines, _opts) do



lines |> String.rstrip |> String.split("\n")



end



end





We can play with this in a separate module:

odds/line_sigil.exs

defmodule Example do



import LineSigil





def lines do



~l"""



line 1



line 2



and another line in #{__MODULE__}



"""



end



end





IO.inspect Example.lines





This produces ["line 1","line 2","and another line in Elixir.Example"].

Because we import the sigil_l function inside the example module, the ~l sigil is lexically scoped to this module. Note also that Elixir performs interpolation before passing the string to our method. That’s because we used a lowercase l. If our sigil were ~L{…} and the function were renamed sigil_L, no interpolation would be performed.

The predefined sigil functions are sigil_C, sigil_c, sigil_R, sigil_r, sigil_S, sigil_s, sigil_W, and sigil_w. If you want to override one of these, you’ll need to explicitly import the Kernel module and use an except clause to exclude it.

In this example, we used the heredoc syntax ("""). This passes our function a multiline string with leading spaces removed. Sigil options are not supported with heredocs, so we’ll switch to a regular literal syntax to play with them.





Picking Up the Options


Let’s write a sigil that enables us to specify color constants. If we say ~c{red}, we’ll get 0xff0000, the RGB representation. We’ll also support the option h to return an HSB value, so ~c{red}h will be {0,100,100}.

Here’s the code:

odds/color.exs

defmodule ColorSigil do





@color_map [



rgb: [ red: 0xff0000, green: 0x00ff00, blue: 0x0000ff, # ...



],



hsb: [ red: {0,100,100}, green: {120,100,100}, blue: {240,100,100}



]



]





def sigil_c(color_name, []), do: _c(color_name, :rgb)



def sigil_c(color_name, 'r'), do: _c(color_name, :rgb)



def sigil_c(color_name, 'h'), do: _c(color_name, :hsb)





defp _c(color_name, color_space) do



@color_map[color_space][binary_to_atom(color_name)]



end





defmacro __using__(_opts) do



quote do



import Kernel, except: [sigil_c: 2]



import unquote(__MODULE__), only: [sigil_c: 2]



end



end



end





defmodule Example do



use ColorSigil





def rgb, do: IO.inspect ~c{red}



def hsb, do: IO.inspect ~c{red}h



end





Example.rgb #=> 16711680 (== 0xff0000)



Example.hsb #=> {0,100,100}





The three clauses for the sigil_c function let us select the colorspace to use based on the option passed. As the single-quoted string 'r' is actually represented by the list [?r], we can use the string literal to pattern match the options parameter.

Because I’m overriding a built-in sigil, I decided to implement a __using__ macro that automatically removes the Kernel version and adds our own (but only in the lexical scope that calls use on our module).

The fact that we can write our own sigils is liberating. But misuse could lead to some pretty impenetrable code.





Your Turn


Exercise: MoreCoolStuff-1

Write a sigil ~v that parses multiple lines of comma-separated data, returning a list where each element is a row of data and each row is a list of values. Don’t worry about quoting—just assume each field is separated by a comma. csv = ~v"""



1,2,3



cat,dog



"""





would generate [["1","2","3"], ["cat","dog"]].



Exercise: MoreCoolStuff-2

The function Float.parse converts leading characters of a string to a float, returning either a tuple containing the value and the rest of the string, or the atom :error.

Update your CSV sigil so that numbers are automatically converted. csv = ~v"""



1,2,3.14



cat,dog



"""





should generate [[1.0,2.0,3.14], ["cat","dog"]].



Exercise: MoreCoolStuff-3

(Hard) Sometimes the first line of a CSV file is a list of the column names. Update your code to support this, and return the values in each row as a keyword list, using the column names as the keys. csv = ~v"""



Item,Qty,Price



Teddy bear,4,34.95



Milk,1,2.99



Battery,6,8.00



"""





would generate [



[Item: "Teddy bear", Qty: 4, Price: 34.95],



[Item: "Milk", Qty: 1, Price: 2.99],



[Item: "Battery", Qty: 6, Price: 8.00]



]





Multi-app Umbrella Projects


It is unfortunate that Erlang chose to call self-contained bundles of code apps. In many ways, they are closer to being shared libraries. And as your projects grow, you may find yourself wanting to split your code into multiple libraries, or apps. Fortunately, mix makes this painless.

To illustrate the process, we’ll create a simple Elixir evaluator. Given a set of input lines, it will return the result of evaluating each. This will be one app.

To test it, we’ll need to pass in lists of lines. We’ve already written a trivial ~l sigil that creates lists of lines for us, so we’ll make that sigil code into a separate application.

Elixir calls these multi-app projects umbrella projects.





Create an Umbrella Project


We use mix new to create an umbrella project, passing it the --umbrella option.

$ mix new --umbrella eval



* creating README.md



* creating mix.exs



* creating apps





Compared to a normal mix project, the umbrella is pretty lightweight—just a mix file and an apps directory.





Create the Subprojects


Subprojects are stored in the apps directory. There’s nothing special about them—they are simply regular projects created using mix new. Let’s create our two projects now:

$ cd eval/apps



$ mix new line_sigil



* creating README.md



... and so on



$ mix new evaluator



* creating README.md



... and so on



* creating test/evaluator_test.exs





At this point we can try out our umbrella project. Go back to the overall project directory and try mix compile.

$ cd ..



$ mix compile



==> evaluator



Compiled lib/evaluator.ex



Generated evaluator.app



==> line_sigil



Compiled lib/line_sigil.ex



Generated line_sigil.app





Now we have an umbrella project containing two regular projects. Because there’s nothing special about the subprojects, you can use all the regular mix commands in them. At the top level, though, you can build all the subprojects as a unit.





Making the Subproject Decision


The fact that subprojects are just regular mix projects means you don’t have to worry about whether to start a new project using an umbrella. Simply start as a simple project. If you later discover the need for an umbrella project, create it and move your existing simple project into the apps directory.





The LineSigil Project


This project is trivial—just copy the LineSigil module from the previous section into apps/line_sigil/lib/line_sigil.ex. Verify it builds by running mix compile—in either the top-level directory or the line_sigil directory.





The Evaluator Project


The evaluator takes a list of strings containing Elixir expressions and evaluates them. It returns a list containing the expressions intermixed with the value of each. For example, given

a = 3



b = 4



a + b





Our code will return

code> a = 3



value> 3



code> b = 4



value> 4



code> a + b



value> 7





We’ll use Code.eval_string to execute the Elixir expressions. To have the values of variables pass from one expression to the next, we’ll also need to explicitly maintain the current binding.

Here’s the code:

odds/eval/apps/evaluator/lib/evaluator.ex

defmodule Evaluator do





def eval(list_of_expressions) do



{ result, _final_binding } =



Enum.reduce(list_of_expressions,



{_result = [], _binding = binding()},



&evaluate_with_binding/2)



Enum.reverse result



end





defp evaluate_with_binding(expression, { result, binding }) do



{ next_result, new_binding } = Code.eval_string(expression, binding)



{ [ "value> #{next_result}", "code> #{expression}" | result ], new_binding }



end



end





Linking the Subprojects


Now we need to test our evaluator. It makes sense to use our ~l sigil to create lists of expressions, so let’s write our tests that way.

Here are some of the tests we want to write:

odds/eval/apps/evaluator/test/evaluator_test.exs

defmodule EvaluatorTest do



use ExUnit.Case





import LineSigil





test "evaluates a basic expression" do



input = ~l"""



1 + 2



"""





output = ~l"""



code> 1 + 2



value> 3



"""





run_test input, output



end





test "variables are propogated" do



input = ~l"""



a = 123



a + 1



"""



output = ~l"""



code> a = 123



value> 123



code> a + 1



value> 124



"""





run_test input, output



end





defp run_test(lines, output) do



assert output == Evaluator.eval(lines)



end



end





But if we simply run this, Elixir won’t be able to find the LineSigil module. To remedy that we need to add it as a dependency of our project. But we want that dependency only in the test environment, so our mix.exs gets a little more complicated.

odds/eval/apps/evaluator/mix.exs

defmodule Evaluator.Mixfile do



use Mix.Project





def project do



[ app: :evaluator,



version: "0.0.1",



deps: deps(Mix.env) ]



end





# Configuration for the OTP application



def application do



[ ]



end





defp deps(:test) do



[ { :line_sigil, path: "../line_sigil" } ] ++ deps(:default)



end





defp deps(_) do



[]



end



end





Now we can run tests from the top-level directory.

$ mix test



...





Finished in 0.06 seconds (0.06s on load, 0.00s on tests)



3 tests, 0 failures





Finished in 0.00 seconds



0 tests, 0 failures





The first stanza of test output is for the evaluator tests, and the second is for line_sigil, which currently is test-free.





But Wait! There’s More!


We’ve reached the end of our Elixir exploration.

This book was never intended to be exhaustive. Instead, it is intended to hit the highlights, and to give you enough information to start coding apps in Elixir yourself.

That means there’s a lot more to learn, both about the language and about how to write great apps in it.

And I think that’s fun. Enjoy!





Appendix 1





Exceptions: raise and try, catch and throw




* * *



Elixir (like Erlang) takes the view that errors should normally be fatal to the processes in which they occur. A typical Elixir application’s design involves many processes, which means the effects of an error will be localized. A supervisor will detect the failing process, and the restart will be handled at that level.

For that reason, you won’t find much exception-handling code in Elixir programs. Exceptions are raised, but you rarely catch them.

Use exceptions for things that are exceptional—things that should never happen.

Exceptions do exist. This appendix is an overview of how to generate them and how to catch them when they occur.





Raising an Exception


You can raise an exception using the raise function. At its simplest, you pass it a string and it generates an exception of type RuntimeError.

iex> raise "Giving up"



** (RuntimeError) Giving up



erl_eval.erl:572: :erl_eval.do_apply/6





You can also pass the type of the exception, along with other optional fields. All exceptions implement at least the message field.

iex> raise RuntimeError



** (RuntimeError) runtime error



erl_eval.erl:572: :erl_eval.do_apply/6



iex> raise RuntimeError, message: "override message"



** (RuntimeError) override message



erl_eval.erl:572: :erl_eval.do_apply/6





You can intercept exceptions using the try function. It takes a block of code to execute, and optional rescue, catch, and after clauses.

The rescue and catch clauses look a bit like the body of a case function—they take patterns and code to execute if the pattern matches. The subject of the pattern is the exception that was raised.

Here’s an example of exception handling in action. We define a module that has a public function, start. It calls a different helper function depending on the value of its parameter. With 0, it runs smoothly. With 1, 2, or 3, it causes the VM to raise an error, which we catch and report.

exceptions/exception.ex

defmodule Boom do





def start(n) do



try do



raise_error(n)



rescue



[ FunctionClauseError, RuntimeError ] ->



IO.puts "no function match or runtime error"



error in [ArithmeticError] ->



IO.puts "Uh-oh! Arithmetic error: #{error.message}"



raise error, [ message: "too late, we're doomed"], System.stacktrace



other_errors ->



IO.puts "Disaster! #{other_errors.message}"



after



IO.puts "DONE!"



end



end





defp raise_error(0) do



IO.puts "No error"



end





defp raise_error(1) do



IO.puts "About to divide by zero"



1 / 0



end





defp raise_error(2) do



IO.puts "About to call a function that doesn't exist"



raise_error(99)



end





defp raise_error(3) do



IO.puts "About to try creating a directory with no permission"



File.mkdir!("/not_allowed")



end



end





We define three different exception patterns. The first matches one of the two exceptions, FunctionClauseError or RuntimeError. The second matches an ArithmeticError and stores the exception value in the variable error. And the last clause catches any exception into the variable other_error.

We also include an after clause. This will always run at the end of the try function, regardless of whether an exception was raised.

Finally, look at the handling of ArithmeticError. As well as reporting the error, we call raise again, passing in the existing exception but overriding its message. We also pass in the stack trace (which is actually the stack trace at the point the original exception was raised). Let’s see all this in iex:

iex c("exception.ex")



.../exception.ex:19: this expression will fail with a 'badarith' exception



[Boom]



iex> Boom.start 1



About to divide by zero



Uh-oh! Arithmetic error: bad argument in arithmetic expression



DONE!



** (ArithmeticError) too late, we're doomed



exception.ex:25: Boom.raise_error/1



exception.ex:5: Boom.start/1





iex> Boom.start 2



About to call a function that doesn't exist



no function match or runtime error



DONE!



:ok



iex> Boom.start 3



About to try creating a directory with no permission



Disaster! could not make directory /not_allowed: permission denied



DONE!



:ok





catch, exit, and throw


Elixir code (and the underlying Erlang libraries) can raise a second kind of error. These are generated when a process calls error, exit, or throw. All three take a parameter, which is available to the catch handler.

Here’s an example:

exceptions/catch.ex

defmodule Catch do





def start(n) do



try do



incite(n)



catch



:exit, code -> "Exited with code #{inspect code}"



:throw, value -> "throw called with #{inspect value}"



what, value -> "Caught #{inspect what} with #{inspect value}"



end



end





defp incite(1) do



exit(:something_bad_happened)



end





defp incite(2) do



throw {:animal, "wombat"}



end





defp incite(3) do



:erlang.error "Oh no!"



end



end





Calling the start function with 1, 2, or 3 will cause an exit, a throw, or an error to be thrown. Just to illustrate wildcard pattern matching, we handle the last case by matching any type into the variable what.

iex> c("catch.ex")



[Catch]



iex> Catch.start 1



"Exited with code :something_bad_happened"



iex> Catch.start 2



"throw called with {:animal,\"wombat\"}"



iex> Catch.start 3



"Caught :error with \"Oh no!\""





Defining Your Own Exceptions


Exceptions in Elixir are basically records. You can define your own exceptions by creating a module. Inside it, use defexception to define the various fields in the exception, along with their default values. Because you’re creating a module, you can also add functions—often these are used to format the exception’s fields into meaningful messages.

Say we’re writing a library to talk to a Microsoft Kinect controller. It might want to raise an exception on various kinds of communication error. Some of these are permanent, but others are likely to be transient and can be retried. We’ll define our exception with its (required) message field and an additional can_retry field. We’ll also add a function that formats these two fields into a nice message.

exceptions/defexception.ex

defmodule KinectProtocolError do





defexception message: "Kinect protocol error",



can_retry: false





def full_message(me) do



"Kinect failed: #{me.message}, retriable: #{me.can_retry}"



end





end





Users of our library could write code like this:

exceptions/defexception.ex

try do



talk_to_kinect



rescue



error in [KinectProtocolError] ->



IO.puts KinectProtocolError.full_message(error)



if error.can_retry, do: schedule_retry



end





If an exception gets raised, the code handles it and possibly retries:

Kinect failed: usb unplugged, retriable: true



Retrying in 10 seconds





Now Ignore This Appendix


The Elixir source code for the mix utility contains no exception handlers. The Elixir compiler itself contains a total of five (but it is doing some pretty funky things).

If you find yourself defining new exceptions, ask if you should be isolating the code in a separate process instead. After all, if it can go wrong, wouldn’t you want to isolate it?





Appendix 2





Type Specifications and Type Checking




* * *



When we looked at defcallback,, we saw that we defined callbacks in terms of their parameter types and return value. For example, we might write

defcallback parse(uri_info :: URI.Info.t) :: URI.Info.t



defcallback default_port() :: integer





The terms URI.Info.t and integer are examples of type specifications. And, as José Valim pointed out to me, the cool thing is that they are implemented (by Yurii Rashkovskii) directly in the Elixir language itself—no special parsing is involved. This is a fantastic illustration of the power of Elixir metaprogramming.

In this appendix we’ll discuss how to specify types in Elixir. But before we do, there’s another question to address: Why bother?





When Specifications Are Used


Elixir type specifications come from Erlang. It is very common to see Erlang code where every exported (public) function is preceded by a -spec line. This is metadata that gives type information. The following code comes from the Elixir parser (which is [currently] written in Erlang). It says the return_error function takes two parameters, an integer and any type, and never returns.

-spec return_error(integer(), any()) -> no_return().



return_error(Line, Message) ->



throw({error, {Line, ?MODULE, Message}}).





One of the reasons the Erlang folks do this is to document their code. You can read it inline while reading the source, and you can also read it in the pages created by their documentation tool.

The other reason is that they have tools such as dialyzer that perform static analysis of Erlang code and report on some kinds of type mismatches.[29]

These same benefits can apply to Elixir code. We have the @spec module attribute for documenting a function’s type specification; in iex we have the s helper for displaying specifications and the t helper for showing user-defined types. You can also run Erlang tools such as dialyzer on compiled Elixir .beam files.

However, type specifications are not currently in wide use in the Elixir world. Whether you use them is a matter of personal taste.





Specifying a Type


A type is simply a subset of all possible values in a language. For example, the type integer means all the possible integer values, but excludes lists, binaries, PIDs, and so on.

The basic types in Elixir are any, atom, char_list (a single-quoted string), float, fun, integer, map, none, pid, port, reference, and tuple.

The type any (and its alias, _) is the set of all values, and none is the empty set.

A literal atom or integer is the set containing just that value.

The value nil can be represented as [] or nil.





Collection Types


A list is represented as [type], where type is any of the basic or combined types. This notation does not signify a list of one element—it simply says that elements of the list will be of the given type. If you want to specify a nonempty list, use [type, ...]. As a convenience, the type list is an alias for [any].

Binaries are represented using this syntax:

<< >>

An empty binary (size 0)



<< _ : size >>

A sequence of size bits. This is called a bitstring.



<< _ : size * unit_size >>

A sequence of size units, where each unit is unit_size bits long.



In the last two instances, size can be specified as _, in which case the binary has an arbitrary number of bits/units.

The predefined type bitstring is equivalent to <<_::_>>, an arbitrarily sized sequence of bits. Similarly, binary is defined as <<_::_*8>>, an arbitrary sequence of 8-bit bytes.

Tuples are represented as { type, type,… }, or using the type tuple, so both {atom,integer} and tuple(atom,integer} represent a tuple whose first element is an atom and whose second element is an integer.





Combining Types


The range operator (..) can be used with literal integers to create a type representing that range. The three built-in types non_neg_integer, pos_integer, and neg_integer represent integers that are greater than or equal to, greater than, or less than zero, respectively.

The union operator (|) indicates that the acceptable values are the unions of its arguments.

Parentheses may be used to group terms in a type specification.





Types and Structures


As structures are basically maps, you could just use the map type for them, but doing so throws away a lot of useful information. Instead, I recommend that you define a specific type for each struct:

defmodule LineItem do



defstruct sku: "", quantity: 1



@type t :: %LineItem{sku: String.t, quantity: integer}



end





You can then reference this type as LineItem.t.





Anonymous Functions


Anonymous functions are specified using (head -> return_type).

The head specifies the arity and possibly the types of the function parameters. It can be ..., meaning an arbitrary number of arbitrarily typed arguments, or a list of types, in which case the number of types is the function’s arity.

(... -> integer) # Arbitrary parameters; returns an integer



(list(integer) -> integer) # Takes a list of integers and returns an integer



(() -> String.t) # Takes no parameters and returns an Elixir string



(integer, atom -> list(atom)) # Takes an integer and an atom and returns



# a list of atoms





You can put parentheses around the head if you find it more clear:

( atom, float -> list )



( (atom, float) -> list )



(list(integer) -> integer)



((list(integer)) -> integer)





Handling Truthy Values


The type as_boolean(T) says that the actual value matched will be of type T, but the function that uses the value will treat it as a truthy value (anything other than nil or false is considered true). Thus the specification for the Elixir function Enum.count is

@spec count(t, (element -> as_boolean(term))) :: non_neg_integer





Some Examples


integer | float

Any number (Elixir has an alias for this).



[ {atom, any} ]

list(atom, any)

A list of key/value pairs. The two forms are the same.



non_neg_integer | {:error, String.t}

An integer greater than or equal to zero, or a tuple containing the atom :error and a string.



( integer, atom -> { :pair, atom, integer } )

An anonymous function that takes an integer and an atom and returns a tuple containing the atom :pair, an atom, and an integer.



<< _ :: _ * 4 >>

A sequence of 4-bit nibbles.





Defining New Types


The attribute @type can be used to define new types.

@type type_name :: type_specification





Elixir uses this to predefine some built-in types and aliases.

@type term :: any



@type binary :: <<_::_*8>>



@type bitstring :: <<_::_*1>>



@type boolean :: false | true



@type byte :: 0..255



@type char :: 0..0x10ffff



@type list :: [ any ]



@type list(t) :: [ t ]



@type number :: integer | float



@type module :: atom



@type mfa :: {module, atom, byte}



@type node :: atom



@type timeout :: :infinity | non_neg_integer



@type no_return :: none





As the list entries show, you can parameterize the types in a new definition. Simply use one or more identifiers as parameters on the left side, and use these identifiers where you’d otherwise use type names on the left. Then when you use the newly defined type, pass in actual types for each of these parameters:

@type variant(type_name, type) = { :variant, type_name, type)





@spec create_string_tuple(:string, String.t) :: variant(:string, String.t)





As well as @type, Elixir has the @typep and @opaque module attributes. They have the same syntax as @type, and do basically the same thing. The difference is in the visibility of the result.

@typep defines a type that is local to the module that contains it—the type is private. @opaque defines a type whose name may be known outside the module but whose definition is not.





Specs for Functions and Callbacks


The @spec specifies a function’s parameter count, types, and return-value type. It can appear anywhere in a module that defines the function, but by convention it sits immediately before the function definition, following any function documentation.

We’ve already seen the syntax:

@spec function_name( param1_type, …) :: return_type

Let’s see some examples. These come from the built-in Dict module.

Line 1@type key :: any



2 @type value :: any



3 @type keys :: [ key ]



4 @type t :: tuple | list # `t` is the type of the collection



5



6 @spec values(t) :: [value]



7 @spec size(t) :: non_neg_integer



8 @spec has_key?(t, key) :: boolean



9 @spec update(t, key, value, (value -> value)) :: t





Line 6

values takes a collection (tuple or list) and returns a list of values (any).



Line 7

size takes a collection and returns an integer (>= 0).



Line 8

has_key? takes a collection and a key, and returns true or false.



Line 9

update takes a collection, a key, a value, and a function that maps a value to a value. It returns a (new) collection.



For functions with multiple heads (or those that have default values), you can specify multiple @spec attributes. Here’s an example from the Enum module:

@spec at(t, index) :: element | nil



@spec at(t, index, default) :: element | default





def at(collection, n, default \\ nil) when n >= 0 do



...



end





The Enum module also has many examples of the use of as_boolean:

@spec filter(t, (element -> as_boolean(term))) :: list



def filter(collection, fun) when is_list(collection) do



...



end





This says filter takes something enumerable and a function. That function maps an element to a term (which is an alias for any), and the filter function treats that value as being truthy. filter returns a list.

For more information on Elixir support for type specifications, look at the documentation for the Kernel.Typespec module.[30]





Using Dialyzer


Dialyzer analyzes code that runs on the Erlang VM, looking for potential errors. To use it with Elixir, we have to compile our source into .beam files and make sure that the debug_info compiler option is set (which it is when running mix in the default, development mode). Let’s see how to do that by creating a trivial project with two source files. We’ll also remove the supervisor that mix creates, because we don’t want to drag OTP into this exercise.

$ mix new simple



...



$ cd simple



$ rm lib/simple/supervisor.ex





Inside the project, let’s create a simple function. Being lazy, I haven’t implemented the body yet.

defmodule Simple do



@type atom_list :: list(atom)



@spec count_atoms(atom_list) :: non_neg_integer



def count_atoms(list) do



# ...



end



end





Let’s run dialyzer on our code. Because it works from .beam files, we have to remember to compile before we run dialyzer.

$ mix compile



.../simple/lib/simple.ex:4: variable list is unused



Compiled lib/simple.ex



Generated simple.app



$ dialyzer _build/dev/lib/simple/ebin



Checking whether the PLT /Users/dave/.dialyzer_plt is up-to-date...



dialyzer: Could not find the PLT: /Users/dave/.dialyzer_plt



Use the options:



--build_plt to build a new PLT; or



--add_to_plt to add to an existing PLT





For example, use a command like the following:



dialyzer --build_plt --apps erts kernel stdlib mnesia



Note that building a PLT such as the above may take 20 mins or so





If you later need information about other applications, say crypto,



you can extend the PLT by the command:



dialyzer --add_to_plt --apps crypto



For applications that are not in Erlang/OTP use an absolute file name.





Oops. This looks serious, but it’s not. Dialyzer needs the specifications for all the runtime libraries you’re using. It stores them in a cache, which it calls a persistent lookup table, or plt. For now we’ll initialize this with the basic Erlang runtime (erts), and the basic Elixir runtime. You can always add more apps to it later.

To do this, you first have to find your Elixir libraries. Fire up iex, and run:

iex> :code.lib_dir(:elixir)



/users/dave/Play/elixir/lib/elixir





The path on my system is a little unusual, as I build locally. But take whatever path it shows you, and add /ebin to it—that’s what we’ll give to dialyzer. (This will take several minutes.)

$ dialyzer --build_plt --apps erts /Users/dave/Play/elixir/lib/elixir/ebin



Creating PLT /Users/dave/.dialyzer_plt ...



Unknown functions:



'Elixir.Access.BitString':'__impl__'/1



'Elixir.Access.Float':'__impl__'/1



'Elixir.Access.Function':'__impl__'/1



: :





You can safely ignore the warnings about unknown functions and types.

Now let’s rerun our project analysis.

$ dialyzer _build/dev/lib/simple/ebin



Checking whether the PLT /Users/dave/.dialyzer_plt is up-to-date... yes



Proceeding with analysis...



simple.ex:1: Invalid type specification for function



'Elixir.Simple':count_atoms/1. The success typing is (_) -> 'nil'



done in 0m0.29s



done (warnings were emitted)





It’s complaining that the typespec for count_atoms doesn’t agree with the implementation. The success typing (think of this as the actual type)[31] returns nil, but the spec says it is an integer. Dialyzer has caught our stubbed-out body. Let’s fix that:

defmodule Simple do



@type atom_list :: list(atom)



@spec count_atoms(atom_list) :: non_neg_integer



def count_atoms(list) do



length list



end



end





Compile and dialyze:

$ mix compile



Compiled lib/simple.ex



Generated simple.app



$ dialyzer _build/dev/lib/simple/ebin



Checking whether the PLT /Users/dave/.dialyzer_plt is up-to-date... yes



Proceeding with analysis... done in 0m0.29s



done (passed successfully)





Let’s add a second module that calls our count_atoms function:

typespecs/simple/lib/simple/client.ex

defmodule Client do



@spec other_function() :: non_neg_integer



def other_function do



Simple.count_atoms [1, 2, 3]



end



end





Compile and dialyze:

$ mix compile



Compiled lib/client.ex



Compiled lib/simple.ex



Generated simple.app



$ dialyzer _build/dev/lib/simple/ebin



Checking whether the PLT /Users/dave/.dialyzer_plt is up-to-date... yes



Proceeding with analysis...



client.ex:4: Function other_function/0 has no local return



client.ex:5: The call 'Elixir.Simple':count_atoms([1 | 2 | 3,...])



breaks the contract (atom_list()) -> non_neg_integer()



done in 0m0.29s





That’s pretty cool. Dialyzer noticed that we called count_atoms with a list of integers, and it is specified to receive a list of atoms. It also decided this would raise an error, so the function would never return (that’s the no local return warning). Let’s fix that.

defmodule Client do



@spec other_function() :: non_neg_integer



def other_function do



Simple.count_atoms [:a, :b, :c]



end



end





$ mix compile



Compiled lib/client.ex



Compiled lib/simple.ex



Generated simple.app



$ dialyzer _build/dev/lib/simple/ebin



Checking whether the PLT /Users/dave/.dialyzer_plt is up-to-date... yes



Proceeding with analysis... done in 0m0.27s



done (passed successfully)





And so it goes…





Dialyzer and Type Inference


In this appendix, we’ve shown dialyzer working with type specs that we added to our functions. But it also does a credible job with unannotated code. This is because dialyzer knows the types of the built-in functions (remember when we ran it with --build_plt?) and can infer (some of) your function types from this. Here’s a simple example:

defmodule NoSpecs do



def length_plus_n(list, n) do



length(list) + n



end



def call_it do



length_plus_n(2, 1)



end



end





Compile this, and run dialyzer on the .beam file:

$ dialyzer _build/dev/lib/simple/ebin/Elixir.NoSpecs.beam



Checking whether the PLT /Users/dave/.dialyzer_plt is up-to-date... yes



Proceeding with analysis...



no_specs.ex:7: Function call_it/0 has no local return



no_specs.ex:8: The call 'Elixir.NoSpecs':length_plus_n(2,1) will never



return since it differs in the 1st argument from the success typing



arguments: ([any()],number())



done in 0m0.28s



done (warnings were emitted)





Here it noticed that the length_plus_n function called length on its first parameter, and length requires a list as an argument. This means length_plus_n also needs a list argument, and so it complains.

What happens if we change the call to Simple.count_atoms [[:a, :b], :c]?

$ dialyzer _build/dev/lib/simple/ebin/Elixir.NoSpecs.beam



Checking whether the PLT /Users/dave/.dialyzer_plt is up-to-date... yes



Proceeding with analysis...



no_specs.ex:7: Function call_it/0 has no local return



no_specs.ex:8: The call 'Elixir.NoSpecs':length_plus_n(['a', 'b'],'c')



will never return since it differs in the 2nd argument from the



success typing arguments: ([any()],number())



done in 0m0.29s



done (warnings were emitted)





This is even cooler. It knows that + (which is implemented as a function) takes two numeric arguments. When we pass an atom as the second parameter, dialyzer recognizes that this makes no sense, and complains. But look at the error. It isn’t complaining about the addition. Instead, it has assigned a default typespec to our function, based on its analysis of what we call inside that function.

This is success typing. Dialyzer attempts to infer the most permissive types that are compatible with the code—it assumes the code is correct until it finds a contradiction. This makes it a powerful tool, as it can make assumptions as it runs.

Does that mean you don’t need @spec attributes? That’s your call. Try it with and without. Often, adding a @spec will further constrain a function’s type signature. We saw this with our count_of_atoms function, where the spec made it explicit that we expected a list of atoms as an argument.

Ultimately, dialyzer is a tool, not a test of your coding chops. Use it as such, but don’t waste time adding specs to get a gold star.





Footnotes


[29]

http://www.erlang.org/doc/man/dialyzer.html



[30]

http://elixir-lang.org/docs/stable/elixir/Kernel.Typespec.html



[31]

http://www.it.uu.se/research/group/hipe/papers/succ_types.pdf





Bibliography




* * *



[Arm13]

Joe Armstrong. Programming Erlang: Software for a Concurrent World. The Pragmatic Bookshelf, Raleigh, NC and Dallas, TX, Second edition, 2013.





About Pragmatic Bookshelf


The Pragmatic Programmers is an agile publishing company. We’re here because we want to improve the lives of developers. We do this by creating timely, practical titles, written by programmers for programmers. Our ebooks do not contain any Digital Restrictions Management, and have always been DRM-free.

We pioneered the beta book concept, where you can purchase and read a book while it’s still being written, and provide feedback to the author to help make a better book for everyone.

Free resources for all purchasers include source code downloads (if applicable), errata and discussion forums, all available on the book's home page at pragprog.com.

We’re here to make your life easier.





New Book Announcements


Want to keep up on our latest titles and announcements, and occasional special offers? Just create an account on pragprog.com (email address and password is all it takes) and select the checkbox to receive newsletters. You can also follow us on twitter @pragprog.





About Ebook Formats


If you buy directly from our website at pragprog.com, you get ebooks in all available formats for one price. You can have your ebook emailed directly to your Kindle, and you can synch your ebooks amongst all your devices (including iPhone/iPad, Android, laptops, etc.) via Dropbox, including free updates for the life of the edition. And of course, you can always come back and re-download your books when needed.

Ebooks bought from the Amazon Kindle store are subject to Amazon's polices.

Limitations in Amazon's file format may cause ebooks to display differently on different devices. For more information, please see our FAQ at pragprog.com/frequently-asked-questions/ebooks.

To learn more about this book and access the free resources, go to pragprog.com and search on the title to get to the book's homepage.

Thanks for your continued support,



Andy Hunt



Dave Thomas

The Pragmatic Programmers





