

Chapter 9





An Aside—What Are Types?

* * *



The preceding two chapters described the basics of lists and dictionaries. But you may have noticed that, although I talked about them as types, I didn’t really say what I meant.

The first thing to understand is that the primitive data types are not necessarily the same as the types they can represent.

For example, a primitive Elixir list is just an ordered list of values. We can use the […] literal to create a list, and the | operator to deconstruct and build lists.

Then there’s another layer. Elixir has the List module, which provides a set of functions that operate on lists. Often these functions simply use recursion and the | operator to add this extra functionality.

In my mind, there’s a difference between the primitive list and the functionality of the List module. The primitive list is an implementation, whereas the List module adds a layer of abstraction. Both implement types, but the type is different. Primitive lists, for example, don’t have a flatten function.

Maps are also a primitive type. And, like lists, they have an Elixir module that implements a richer, derived map type.

The Keyword type is an Elixir module. But it is implemented as a list of tuples:

options = [ {:width, 72}, {:style, "light"}, {:style, "print"} ]





Clearly this is still a list, and all the list functions will work on it. But Elixir adds functionality to give you dictionary-like behaviour.

iex> options = [ {:width, 72}, {:style, "light"}, {:style, "print"} ]



[width: 72, style: "light", style: "print"]



iex> List.last options



{:style, "print"}



iex> Keyword.get_values options, :style



["light", "print"]





In a way, this is a form of the duck typing that is talked about in dynamic object-oriented languages.[15] The Keyword module doesn’t have an underlying primitive data type. It simply assumes that any value it works on is a list that has been structured a certain way.

This means the APIs for collections in Elixir are fairly broad. Working with a keyword list, you have access to the APIs in the primitive list type, and the List and Keyword modules. You also get Enum and Collectable, which we talk about next.





Footnotes


[15]

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Duck_typing



