


Chapter 18





OTP: Applications




* * *



So far in our quick tour of Elixir and OTP we’ve looked at server processes and the supervisors that monitor them. There’s one more stage in our journey—the application.





This Is Not Your Father’s Application


Because OTP comes from the Erlang world, it uses Erlang names for things. And unfortunately, some of these names are not terribly descriptive. The name application is one of these. When most of us talk about applications, we think of a program we run to do something—maybe on our computer or phone, or via a web browser. An application is a self-contained whole.

But in the OTP world, that’s not the case. Instead, an application is a bundle of code that comes with a descriptor. That descriptor tells the runtime what dependencies the code has, what global names it registers, and so on. In fact, an OTP application is more like a dynamic link library or a shared object than a conventional application.

It might help to see the word application and in your head but pronounce it component or service.

For example, back when we were fetching GitHub issues using the HTTPoison library, what we actually installed was an independent application containing HTTPoison. Although it looked like we were just using a library, mix automatically loaded the HTTPoison application. When we then started it, HTTPoison in turn started a couple of other applications that it needed (SSL and Hackney), which in turn kicked off their own supervisors and workers. And all of this was transparent to us.

I’ve said that applications are components; but there are some applications that are at the top of the tree and are meant to be run directly.

In this chapter we’ll look at both types of application component (see what I did there?). In reality they’re virtually the same, so let’s cover the common ground first.





The Application Specification File


You probably noticed that every now and then mix will talk about a file called name.app, where name is your application’s name.

This file is called an application specification and is used to define your application to the runtime environment. Mix creates this file automatically from the information in mix.exs combined with information it gleans from compiling your application.

When you run your application this file is consulted to get things loaded.

Your application does not need to use all the OTP functionality—this file will always be created and referred to. However, once you start using OTP supervision trees, stuff you add to mix.exs will get copied into the .app file.





Turning Our Sequence Program into an OTP Application


So, here’s the good news. The application in the previous chapter is already a full-blown OTP application. When mix created the initial project tree, it added a supervisor (which we then modified) and enough information to our mix.exs file to get the application started. In particular, it filled in the application function:

def application do



[mod: { Sequence, [] }]



end





This says that the top-level module of our application is called Sequence. OTP assumes this module will implement a start function, and it will pass that function an empty list as a parameter.

In our previous version of the start function, we ignored the arguments and instead hard-wired the call to start_link to pass 123 to our application. Let’s change that to take the value from mix.exs instead. First, change mix.exs to pass an initial value (we’ll use 456):

def application do



[mod: { Sequence, 456 }]



end





Then change the sequence.ex code to use this passed-in value:

otp-app/sequence/lib/sequence.ex

defmodule Sequence do



use Application





def start(_type, initial_number) do



Sequence.Supervisor.start_link(initial_number)



end



end





We can check that this works:

$ iex -S mix



Compiled lib/sequence.ex



Compiled lib/sequence/subsupervisor.ex



Compiled lib/sequence/stash.ex



Compiled lib/sequence/server.ex



Compiled lib/sequence/supervisor.ex



Generated sequence.app





iex> Sequence.Server.next_number



456





Let’s look at the application function again.

The mod: option tells OTP the module that is the main entry point for our app. If our app is a conventional runnable application, then it will need to start somewhere, so we’d write our kickoff function here. But even pure library applications may need to be initialized. (For example, a logging library may start a background logger process or connect to a central logging server.)

For the sequence app, we tell OTP that the Sequence module is the main entry point. OTP will call this module’s start function when it starts the application. The second element of the tuple is the parameter to pass to this function. In our case, it’s the initial number for the sequence.

There’s a second option we’ll want to add to this.

The registered: option lists the names that our application will register. We can use this to ensure each name is unique across all loaded applications in a node or cluster. In our case, the sequence server registers itself under the name Sequence.Server, so we’ll update the configuration to read as follows:

otp-app/sequence/mix.exs

# Configuration for the OTP application



def application do



[



mod: { Sequence, 456 },



registered: [ Sequence.Server ]



]



end





Now that we’ve done the configuring in mix, we run mix compile, which both compiles the app and updates the sequence.app application specification file with information from mix.exs. (The same thing happens if we run mix using iex -S mix.)

$ mix compile



Compiled lib/sequence.ex



Compiled lib/sequence/server.ex



Compiled lib/sequence/stash.ex



Compiled lib/sequence/subsupervisor.ex



Compiled lib/sequence/supervisor.ex



» Generated sequence.app





Mix tells us it has created a sequence.app file, but where is it? You’ll find it tucked away in _build/dev/lib/sequence/ebin. Although a little obscure, the directory structure under _build is compatible with Erlang’s OTP way of doing things. This makes life easier when you release your code. You’ll notice that the path has dev in it—this keeps things you’re doing in development separate from other build products.

Let’s look at the sequence.app that was generated.

otp-app/sequence/_build/dev/lib/sequence/ebin/sequence.app

{application,sequence,



[{description,"sequence"},



{mod,{'Elixir.Sequence',[]}},



{registered,[sequence]},



{env,[{initial_value,456}]},



{vsn,"0.0.1"},



{modules,['Elixir.Sequence','Elixir.Sequence.Server',



'Elixir.Sequence.Stash',



'Elixir.Sequence.SubSupervisor',



'Elixir.Sequence.Supervisor']},



{applications,[kernel,stdlib,elixir]}]}.





This file contains an Erlang tuple that defines the app. Some of the information comes from the project and application section of mix.exs. Mix also automatically added a list of the names of all the compiled modules in our app (the .beam files) and a list of the apps our app depends on (kernel, stdlib, and elixir). That’s pretty smart.





More on Application Parameters


In the previous example, we passed the integer 456 to the application as an initial parameter. Although valid(ish), we really should have passed in a keyword list instead. That’s because Elixir provides a function, Application.get_env, to retrieve these values from anywhere in our code. So we probably should have set up mix.exs with

def application do



[



mod: { Sequence, [] },



env: [initial_number: 456],



registered: [ :sequence ]



]



end





and then accessed the value using get_env:

defmodule Sequence do



use Application





def start(_type, _args) do



Sequence.Supervisor.start_link(Application.get_env(:sequence, :initial_number))



end





end





Your call.





Supervision Is the Basis of Reliability


Let’s briefly recap. In that last example, we ran our OTP sequence application using mix. Looking at just our code, we see that two supervisor processes and two worker processes got started. These were knitted together so our system continued to run with no loss of state even if the worker that we talked to crashed. And any other Erlang process on this node (including iex itself) can talk to our sequence application and enjoy its stream of freshly minted integers.

You probably noticed that the start function takes two parameters. The second corresponds to the value we specified in the mod: option in the mix.exs file (in our case, the counter’s initial value). The first parameter specifies the status of the restart, which we’re not going to get into, because…





Your Turn


Exercise: OTP-Applications-1

Turn your stack server into an OTP application.



Exercise: OTP-Applications-2

So far, we haven’t written any tests for the application. Is there anything you can test? See what you can do.





Hot Code-Swapping


You may have heard that OTP applications can update their code while they are running. It’s true. In fact, any Elixir program can do it. It’s just that OTP provides a release-management framework that handles it.

However, OTP release management is complex. Something with the potential to deal with dependencies between thousands of processes on hundreds of machines with tens of thousands of modules will, by its nature, be bigger than a breadbox.

However, I can show you the basics.

First, the real deal is not swapping code, but rather swapping state. In an application where everything runs as separate processes, swapping code simply means starting a process with the new code and then sending messages to it.

However, server processes maintain state, and it is likely that changes to the server code will change the structure of the state they hold (adding a field, changing a value, or whatever). So OTP provides a standard server callback that lets a server inherit the state from a prior version of itself.

Alexei Sholik was kind enough to come up with this minimal example of what’s possible.

Let’s go back to the stashed version of the supervised sequence server. Its code looked like this:

otp-supervisor/2/sequence/lib/sequence/server.ex

defmodule Sequence.Server do



use GenServer





#####



# External API





def start_link(stash_pid) do



{:ok, _pid} = GenServer.start_link(__MODULE__, stash_pid, name: __MODULE__)



end



def next_number do



GenServer.call __MODULE__, :next_number



end



def increment_number(delta) do



GenServer.cast __MODULE__, {:increment_number, delta}



end





#####



# GenServer implementation





def init(stash_pid) do



current_number = Sequence.Stash.get_value stash_pid



{ :ok, {current_number, stash_pid} }



end



def handle_call(:next_number, _from, {current_number, stash_pid}) do



{ :reply, current_number, {current_number+1, stash_pid} }



end



def handle_cast({:increment_number, delta}, {current_number, stash_pid}) do



{ :noreply, {current_number + delta, stash_pid}}



end



def terminate(_reason, {current_number, stash_pid}) do



Sequence.Stash.save_value stash_pid, current_number



end



end





If we want to version our code and data, we have to tell OTP the version numbers of what is running. So, at the top of our module we’ll add an @vsn directive.

otp-app/sequence_reload/lib/sequence/server.ex

defmodule Sequence.Server do



use GenServer





@vsn "0"





Our boss calls. We’re about to go for a second round of funding on our wildly successfully sequence-server business, but customers have noticed a bug. We implemented increment_number to add a delta to the current number—a one-time change. But apparently it was instead supposed to set the difference between successive numbers we served.

Let’s try the existing code in iex.

$ iex -S mix



iex> Sequence.Supervisor.start_link 500



{:ok,#PID<0.57.0>}



iex> Sequence.Server.next_number



500



iex> Sequence.Server.increment_number 10



:ok



iex> Sequence.Server.next_number



511



iex> Sequence.Server.next_number



512





Yup, we’re applying the delta only once.

Well, that’s an easy change to the code. We simply have to keep one extra thing in the state—a delta value.We implement the new server code.

otp-app/sequence_reload/updated_server.ex

defmodule Sequence.Server do



use GenServer



require Logger





defmodule State, do: defstruct current_number: 0, stash_pid: nil, delta: 1





@vsn "1"





#####



# External API





def start_link(stash_pid) do



GenServer.start_link(__MODULE__, stash_pid, name: __MODULE__)



end





def next_number do



GenServer.call __MODULE__, :next_number



end





def increment_number(delta) do



GenServer.cast __MODULE__, {:increment_number, delta}



end





#####



# GenServer implementation





def init(stash_pid) do



current_number = Sequence.Stash.get_value stash_pid



{ :ok, %State{current_number: current_number, stash_pid: stash_pid} }



end





def handle_call(:next_number, _from, state) do



{



:reply,



state.current_number,



%{ state | current_number: state.current_number + state.delta }



}



end





def handle_cast({:increment_number, delta}, state) do



{



:noreply,



%{ state | current_number: state.current_number + delta, delta: delta }



}



end





def terminate(_reason, state) do



Sequence.Stash.save_value state.stash_pid, state.current_number



end





def code_change("0", old_state = { current_number, stash_pid }, _extra) do



new_state = %State{current_number: current_number,



stash_pid: stash_pid,



delta: 1



}



Logger.info "Changing code from 0 to 1"



Logger.info inspect(old_state)



Logger.info inspect(new_state)



{ :ok, new_state }



end



end





Notice that we’ve updated the version number to 1. The other big change is that we made the state a struct rather than a tuple and added the delta value. We updated the increment handler to change the value of delta, and the next number handler now adds in the delta each time.

If we simply stop the old server and start the new one, we’ll lose the state stored in the old one. But we can’t just copy the state across—the old server had a single integer and the new one has a struct.

Fortunately, OTP has a callback for this. In the new server, implement the code_change function.

otp-app/sequence_reload/updated_server.ex

def code_change("0", old_state = { current_number, stash_pid }, _extra) do



new_state = %State{current_number: current_number,



stash_pid: stash_pid,



delta: 1



}



Logger.info "Changing code from 0 to 1"



Logger.info inspect(old_state)



Logger.info inspect(new_state)



{ :ok, new_state }



end





The callback takes three arguments—the old version number, the old state, and an additional parameter we don’t use. The callback’s job is to return {:ok, new_state). In our case, the new state is a struct containing the stash PID and the old current number, along with the new delta value, initialized to 1. We’ll use the logger to report on what we did (remembering to add it to the applications list in mix.exs and require it at the top of our server).

This is where it gets a little unrealistic. In a big, live application, we’d configure application and release descriptors and let the OTP release manager do everything for us. But there’s too much fluff in all that for a simple example like this, so we’ll cheat and use Erlang’s sys module to demonstrate a basic upgrade.

First we suspend the existing server.

iex> :sys.suspend Sequence.Server





We then compile and load the new version. Note that the module name is the same as the old module name.

iex> c("updated_server.ex")



.../sequence_reload/updated_server.ex:1: redefining module Sequence.Server



[Sequence.Server]





Now the fun part. We tell OTP to update the new sequence server’s state. We pass it the registered name (we can also use a PID), the module name, the previous version number, and an extra argument. (That extra argument gets passed as the third parameter to the code_change callback in our server.)

iex> :sys.change_code Sequence.Server, Sequence.Server, "0", []



15:36:04.908 [info] Changing code from 0 to 1



15:36:04.910 [info] {122, #PID<0.73.0>}



resuming



15:36:04.918 [info] %Sequence.Server.State{current_number: 122, delta: 1,



stash_pid: #PID<0.73.0>}



:ok





Our callback was indeed triggered—you can see the logging.

Now let’s resume the server and try out the new behavior.

iex> :sys.resume Sequence.Server



:ok



iex> Sequence.Server.next_number



513



iex> Sequence.Server.increment_number 10



:ok



iex> Sequence.next_number



524



iex> Sequence.next_number



534



iex> Sequence.next_number



544





We updated the code while the app was running and just before the investors arrived. Our system’s users wouldn’t have noticed any interruption.

If you’re planning on deploying a big Elixir app, you need to think about release management. Many applications don’t require it—a little downtime while you restart is acceptable. But if you’re aiming for Joe Armstrong’s nine-nines reliability, you’ll need to work on your supervision structure and release procedures.

But once you have it set up, you’ll find that deploying and updating are an automated and repeatable process.





OTP Is Big—Unbelievably Big


This book barely scratches OTP’s surface. But (I hope) it does introduce the major concepts and give you an idea of what’s possible.

More advanced uses of OTP may include release management (including hot code-swapping), handling of distributed failover, automated scaling, and so on. But if you have an application that needs such things, you likely will already have or will soon need dedicated operations experts who know the low-level details of making OTP apps perform the way you need them to.

There is never anything simple about scaling out to the kind of size and sophistication that is possible with OTP. But now you know you can start small and get there.

However, there are ways of writing some OTP servers more simply, and that’s the subject of the next chapter.





Your Turn


Exercise: OTP-Applications-3

Our boss notices that after we applied our version-0-to-version-1 code change, the delta indeed works as specified. However, she also notices that if the server crashes, the delta is forgotten—only the current number is retained. Write a new update that stashes both values.



