



Chapter 17





OTP: Supervisors




* * *



I’ve said it a few times now: the Elixir way says not to worry much about code that crashes; instead, make sure the overall application keeps running.

This might sound contradictory, but really it is not.

Think of a typical application. If an unhandled error causes an exception to be raised, the application stops. Nothing else gets done until it is restarted. If it’s a server handling multiple requests, they all might be lost.

The issue here is that one error takes the whole application down.

But imagine that instead your application consists of hundreds or thousands of processes, each handling just a small part of a request. If one of those crashes, everything else carries on. You might lose the work it’s doing, but you can design your applications to minimize even that risk. And when that process gets restarted, you’re back running at 100%.

In the Elixir and OTP worlds, supervisors perform all of this process monitoring and restarting.





Supervisors and Workers


An Elixir supervisor has just one purpose—it manages one or more worker processes. (As we’ll discuss later, it can also manage other supervisors.)

At its simplest, a supervisor is a process that uses the OTP supervisor behavior. It is given a list of processes to monitor and is told what to do if a process dies, and how to prevent restart loops (when a process is restarted, dies, gets restarted, dies, and so on).

To do this, the supervisor uses the Erlang VM’s process-linking and -monitoring facilities. We talked about these when we covered spawn.

You can write supervisors as separate modules, but the Elixir style is to include them inline. The easiest way to get started is to create your project with the --sup flag. Let’s do this for our sequence server.

» $ mix new --sup sequence



* creating README.md



* creating .gitignore



* creating mix.exs



* creating config



* creating config/config.exs



* creating lib



* creating lib/sequence.ex



* creating test



* creating test/test_helper.exs



* creating test/sequence_test.exs





Nothing looks different, but open lib/sequence.ex.

defmodule Sequence do



use Application





def start(_type, _args) do



import Supervisor.Spec, warn: false





children = [



# Define workers and child supervisors to be supervised



# worker(Sequence.Worker, [arg1, arg2, arg3])



]





opts = [strategy: :one_for_one, name: Sequence.Supervisor]



Supervisor.start_link(children, opts)



end



end





Our start function now creates a supervisor for our application. All we need to do is tell it what we want supervised. Create a lib/sequence directory and copy the Sequence.Server module from the last chapter into it. Then uncomment the worker call in the children list to reference it.

otp-supervisor/1/sequence/lib/sequence.ex

def start(_type, _args) do



import Supervisor.Spec, warn: false





children = [



» worker(Sequence.Server, [123])



]





opts = [strategy: :one_for_one, name: Sequence.Supervisor]



{:ok, _pid} = Supervisor.start_link(children, opts)



end





Let’s look at the sequence of events.

When our application starts, the start function is called.

It creates a list of child servers. It uses the worker function to create a specification of each one. In our case, we want to start Sequence.Server and pass it the parameter 123.

We call Supervisor.start_link, passing it the list of child specifications and a set of options. This creates a supervisor process.

Now our supervisor process calls the start_link function for each of its managed children. In our case, this is the function in Sequence.Server. This code is unchanged—it calls GenServer.start_link to create a GenServer process.



Now we’re up and running. Let’s try it:

$ iex -S mix



Compiled lib/sequence.ex



Compiled lib/sequence/server.ex



Generated sequence.app



iex> Sequence.Server.increment_number 3



:ok



iex> Sequence.Server.next_number



126





So far, so good. But the key thing with a supervisor is that it is supposed to manage our worker process. If it dies, for example, we want it to be restarted. Let’s try that. If we pass increment_number something that isn’t a number, the process should die trying to add it to the current number.

iex(3)> Sequence.Server.increment_number "cat"



:ok



iex(4)> 14:22:06.269 [error] GenServer Sequence.Server terminating



Last message: {:"$gen_cast", {:increment_number, "cat"}}



State: [data: [{'State', "My current state is '127', and I'm happy"}]]



** (exit) an exception was raised:



** (ArithmeticError) bad argument in arithmetic expression



(sequence) lib/sequence/server.ex:27: Sequence.Server.handle_cast/2



(stdlib) gen_server.erl:599: :gen_server.handle_msg/5



(stdlib) proc_lib.erl:239: :proc_lib.init_p_do_apply/3



iex(4)> Sequence.Server.next_number



123



iex(5)> Sequence.Server.next_number



124





We get a wonderful error report that shows us the exception, along with a stack trace from the process. We can also see the message we sent that triggered the problem.

But when we then ask our server for a number, it responds as if nothing had happened. The supervisor restarted our process for us.

This is excellent, but there’s a problem. The supervisor restarted our sequence process with the initial parameters we passed in, and the numbers started again from 123. A reincarnated process has no memory of its past lives, and no state is retained across a crash.





Your Turn


Exercise: OTP-Supervisors-1

Add a supervisor to your stack application. Use iex to make sure it starts the server correctly. Use the server normally, and then crash it (try popping from an empty stack). Did it restart? What were the stack contents after the restart?





Managing Process State Across Restarts


Some servers are effectively stateless. If we had a server that calculated the factors of numbers or responded to network requests with the current time, we could simply restart it and let it run.

But our server is not stateless—it needs to remember the current number so it can generate an increasing sequence.

All of the approaches to this involve storing the state outside of the process. Let’s choose a simple option—we’ll write a separate worker process that can store and retrieve a value. We’ll call it our stash. The sequence server can store its current number in the stash whenever it terminates, and then we can recover the number when we restart.

At this point, we have to think about lifetimes. Our sequence server should be fairly robust, but we’ve already found one thing that crashes it. So in actuarial terms, it isn’t the fittest process in the scheduler queue. But our stash process must be more robust—it must outlive the sequence server, at the very least.

We have to do two things to make this happen. First, we make it as simple as possible. The fewer moving parts in a chunk of code, the less likely it is to go wrong.

Second, we have to supervise it separately. In fact, we’ll create a supervision tree. It’ll look like the following diagram.



Here we have a top-level supervisor that is responsible for the health of two things: the stash worker and a second supervisor. That second supervisor then manages the worker that generates the sequence.

Our sequence generator needs to know the PID of the stash in order to retrieve and store the sequence value. We could register the stash process under a name (just as we did with the sequence worker itself), but as this is purely a local affair, we can pass it the PID directly. However, to do that we need to get the stash worker spawned first. This leads to a slightly different design for the top-level supervisor. We’ll move the code that starts the top-level supervisor out of sequence.ex and into a separate module. Then we’ll initialize it with no children and add the stash and the subsupervisor manually. Once we start the stash worker, we’ll have its PID, and we can then pass it on to the subsupervisor (which in turn will pass it to the sequence worker). Our overall supervisor looks like this:

otp-supervisor/2/sequence/lib/sequence/supervisor.ex

Line 1defmodule Sequence.Supervisor do



- use Supervisor



- def start_link(initial_number) do



- result = {:ok, sup } = Supervisor.start_link(__MODULE__, [initial_number])



5 start_workers(sup, initial_number)



- result



- end



- def start_workers(sup, initial_number) do



- # Start the stash worker



10 {:ok, stash} =



- Supervisor.start_child(sup, worker(Sequence.Stash, [initial_number]))



- # and then the subsupervisor for the actual sequence server



- Supervisor.start_child(sup, supervisor(Sequence.SubSupervisor, [stash]))



- end



15 def init(_) do



- supervise [], strategy: :one_for_one



- end



- end





On line 4 we start up the supervisor. This automatically invokes the init callback. This in turn calls supervise, but passes in an empty list. The supervisor is now running but has no children.

At this point, OTP returns control to our start_link function, which then calls the start_workers function. This starts the stash worker, passing it the initial number. We get back a status of (:ok) and a PID. We then pass the PID to the subsupervisor.

This subsupervisor is basically the same as our very first supervisor—it simply spawns the sequence worker. But instead of passing in a current number, it passes in the stash’s PID.

otp-supervisor/2/sequence/lib/sequence/subsupervisor.ex

defmodule Sequence.SubSupervisor do



use Supervisor





def start_link(stash_pid) do



{:ok, _pid} = Supervisor.start_link(__MODULE__, stash_pid)



end



def init(stash_pid) do



child_processes = [ worker(Sequence.Server, [stash_pid]) ]



supervise child_processes, strategy: :one_for_one



end



end





The sequence worker has two changes. First, when it is initialized it must get the current number from the stash. Second, when it terminates it stores the then-current number back in the stash. To make these changes, we’ll override two more GenServer callbacks: init and terminate.

otp-supervisor/2/sequence/lib/sequence/server.ex

defmodule Sequence.Server do



use GenServer





#####



# External API





def start_link(stash_pid) do



{:ok, _pid} = GenServer.start_link(__MODULE__, stash_pid, name: __MODULE__)



end



def next_number do



GenServer.call __MODULE__, :next_number



end



def increment_number(delta) do



GenServer.cast __MODULE__, {:increment_number, delta}



end





#####



# GenServer implementation





def init(stash_pid) do



current_number = Sequence.Stash.get_value stash_pid



{ :ok, {current_number, stash_pid} }



end



def handle_call(:next_number, _from, {current_number, stash_pid}) do



{ :reply, current_number, {current_number+1, stash_pid} }



end



def handle_cast({:increment_number, delta}, {current_number, stash_pid}) do



{ :noreply, {current_number + delta, stash_pid}}



end



def terminate(_reason, {current_number, stash_pid}) do



Sequence.Stash.save_value stash_pid, current_number



end



end





The stash itself is trivial:

otp-supervisor/2/sequence/lib/sequence/stash.ex

defmodule Sequence.Stash do



use GenServer





#####



# External API





def start_link(current_number) do



{:ok,_pid} = GenServer.start_link( __MODULE__, current_number)



end





def save_value(pid, value) do



GenServer.cast pid, {:save_value, value}



end





def get_value(pid) do



GenServer.call pid, :get_value



end





#####



# GenServer implementation





def handle_call(:get_value, _from, current_value) do



{ :reply, current_value, current_value }



end





def handle_cast({:save_value, value}, _current_value) do



{ :noreply, value}



end



end





And finally, our top-level module has to start the top-level supervisor:

otp-supervisor/2/sequence/lib/sequence.ex

defmodule Sequence do



use Application





def start(_type, _args) do



» {:ok, _pid} = Sequence.Supervisor.start_link(123)



end



end





Let’s work through what is going on here.

We start the top-level supervisor, passing it an initial value for the counter. It starts up the stash worker, giving it this number. It then starts the subsupervisor, passing it the stash’s PID.

The subsupervisor in turn starts the sequence worker. This goes to the stash, gets the current value, and uses that value and the stash PID as its state. The next_number and increment_number functions are unchanged (except they receive the more complex state).

If the sequence worker terminates for any reason, GenServer calls its terminate function. It stores its current value in the stash before dying.

The subsupervisor will notice that a child has died. It will restart the child, passing in the stash PID, and the newly incarnated worker will pick up the current value that was stored when the previous instance died.



At least that’s the theory. Let’s try it:

$ iex -S mix



Compiled lib/sequence.ex



Compiled lib/sequence/server.ex



Compiled lib/sequence/stash.ex



Compiled lib/sequence/subsupervisor.ex



Compiled lib/sequence/supervisor.ex



Generated sequence.app



iex> Sequence.Server.next_number



123



iex> Sequence.Server.next_number



124



iex> Sequence.Server.increment_number 100



:ok



iex> Sequence.Server.next_number



225



iex> Sequence.Server.increment_number "cause it to crash"



:ok



iex>



14:35:07.337 [error] GenServer Sequence.Server terminating



Last message: {:"$gen_cast", {:increment_number, "cause it to crash"}}



State: {226, #PID<0.70.0>}



** (exit) an exception was raised:



** (ArithmeticError) bad argument in arithmetic expression



(sequence) lib/sequence/server.ex:32: Sequence.Server.handle_cast/2



(stdlib) gen_server.erl:599: :gen_server.handle_msg/5



(stdlib) proc_lib.erl:239: :proc_lib.init_p_do_apply/3



iex> Sequence.Server.next_number



226



iex> Sequence.Server.next_number



227





Even though we crashed our sequence worker, it got restarted and the state was preserved. Now we begin to see how careful supervision is critical if we want to write reliable applications.





Supervisors Are the Heart of Reliability


Think about our previous example; it was both trivial and profound. It was trivial because there are many ways of achieving some kind of fault tolerance with a library that returns successive numbers. But it was profound because it is a concrete representation of the idea of building rings of confidence in our code. The outer ring, where our code interacts with the world, should be as reliable as we can make it. But within that ring there are other, nested rings. And in those rings, things can be less than perfect. The trick is to ensure that the code in each ring knows how to deal with failures of the code in the next ring down.

And that’s where supervisors come into play. In this chapter we’ve seen only a small fraction of supervisors’ capabilities. They have different strategies for dealing with the termination of a child, different ways of terminating children, and different ways of restarting them. There’s plenty of information online about using OTP supervisors.

But the real power of supervisors is that they exist. The fact that you use them to manage your workers means you are forced to think about reliability and state as you design your application. And that discipline leads to applications with very high availability—in Programming Erlang: Software for a Concurrent World [Arm13], Joe Armstrong says OTP has been used to build systems with 99.9999999% reliability. That’s nine nines. And that ain’t bad.

There’s one more level in our lightning tour of OTP—the application. And that’s the next chapter’s topic.





Your Turn


Exercise: OTP-Supervisors-2

Rework your stack server to use a supervision tree with a separate stash process to hold the state. Verify that it works and that when you crash the server the state is retained across a restart.


