

Chapter 19





Tasks and Agents




* * *



This part of the book is about processes and process distribution. So far we’ve covered two extremes. In the first chapters we looked at the spawn primitive, along with message sending and receiving and multinode operations. We then looked at OTP, the 800-pound gorilla of process architecture.

Sometimes, though, we want something in the middle. We want to be able to run simple processes, either for background processing or for maintaining state. But we don’t want to be bothered with the low-level details of spawn, send, and receive, and we really don’t need the extra control that writing our own GenServer gives us.

Enter tasks and agents, two simple-to-use Elixir abstractions. These use OTP’s features but insulate us from these details.





Tasks


An Elixir task is a function that runs in the background.

tasks/tasks1.exs

defmodule Fib do



def of(0), do: 0



def of(1), do: 1



def of(n), do: Fib.of(n-1) + Fib.of(n-2)



end





IO.puts "Start the task"



worker = Task.async(fn -> Fib.of(20) end)



IO.puts "Do something else"



# ...



IO.puts "Wait for the task"



result = Task.await(worker)





IO.puts "The result is #{result}"





The call to Task.async creates a separate process that runs the given function. The return value of async is a task descriptor (actually a PID and a ref) that we’ll use to identify the task later.

Once the task is running, the code continues with other work. When it wants to get the function’s value, it calls Task.await, passing in the task descriptor. This call waits for our background task to finish and returns its value.

When we run this, we see

$ elixir tasks1.exs



Start the task



Do something else



Wait for the task



The result is 6765





We can also pass Task.async the name of a module and function, along with any arguments:

tasks/tasks2.exs

worker = Task.async(Fib, :of, [20])



result = Task.await(worker)



IO.puts "The result is #{result}"





Tasks and Supervision


Tasks are implemented as OTP servers, which means we can add them to our application’s supervision tree. We can do this in two ways.

First, we can link a task to a currently supervised process by calling start_link instead of async. This has less impact than you might think. If the function running in the task crashes and we use start_link, our process will be terminated immediately. If instead we use async, our process will be terminated only when we subsequently call await on the crashed task.

The second way to supervise tasks is to run them directly from a supervisor. This is pretty much the same as specifying any other worker:

import Supervisor.Spec





children = [



worker(Task, [ fn -> do_something_extraordinary() end ])



]





supervise children, strategy: :one_for_one





Agents


An agent is a background process that maintains state. This state can be accessed at different places within a process or node, or across multiple nodes.

The initial state is set by a function we pass in when we start the agent.

We can interrogate the state using Agent.get, passing it the agent descriptor and a function. The agent runs the function on its current state and returns the result.

We can also use Agent.update to change the state held by an agent. As with the get operator, we pass in a function. Unlike with get, the function’s result becomes the new state.

Here’s a bare-bones example. We start an agent whose state is the integer 0. We then use the identity function, &(&1), to return that state. Calling Agent.update with &(&1+1) increments the state, as verified by a subsequent get.

iex> { :ok, count } = Agent.start(fn -> 0 end)



{:ok, #PID<0.69.0>}



iex> Agent.get(count, &(&1))



0



iex> Agent.update(count, &(&1+1))



:ok



iex> Agent.update(count, &(&1+1))



:ok



iex> Agent.get(count, &(&1))



2





In the previous example, the variable count holds the agent process’s PID. We can also give agents a local or global name and access them using this name. In this case we exploit the fact that an uppercase bareword in Elixir is converted into an atom with the prefix Elixir., so when we say Sum it is actually the atom :Elixir.Sum.

iex> Agent.start(fn -> 1 end, name: Sum)



{:ok, #PID<0.78.0>}



iex> Agent.get(Sum, &(&1))



1



iex> Agent.update(Sum, &(&1+99))



:ok



iex> Agent.get(Sum, &(&1))



100





The following example shows a more typical use. The Frequency module maintains a list of word/frequency pairs in a hashdict. The dictionary itself is stored in an agent, which is named after the module.

This is all initialized with the start_link function, which, presumably, is invoked during application initialization.

tasks/agent_dict.exs

defmodule Frequency do





def start_link do



Agent.start_link(fn -> HashDict.new end, name: __MODULE__)



end





def add_word(word) do



Agent.update(__MODULE__,



fn dict ->



Dict.update(dict, word, 1, &(&1+1))



end)



end





def count_for(word) do



Agent.get(__MODULE__, fn dict -> Dict.get(dict, word) end)



end





def words do



Agent.get(__MODULE__, fn dict -> Dict.keys(dict) end)



end





end





We can play with this code in iex.

iex> c "agent_dict.exs"



[Frequency]



iex> Frequency.start_link



{:ok, #PID<0.101.0>}



iex> Frequency.add_word "dave"



:ok



iex> Frequency.words



["dave"]



iex(41)> Frequency.add_word "was"



:ok



iex> Frequency.add_word "here"



:ok



iex> Frequency.add_word "he"



:ok



iex> Frequency.add_word "was"



:ok



iex> Frequency.words



["he", "dave", "was", "here"]



iex> Frequency.count_for("dave")



1



iex> Frequency.count_for("was")



2





In a way, you can look at our Frequency module as the implementation part of a gen_server—using agents has simply abstracted away all the housekeeping we had to do.





A Bigger Example


Let’s rewrite our anagram code to use both tasks and an agent.

We’ll load words in parallel from a number of separate dictionaries. A separate task handles each dictionary. We’ll use an agent to store the resulting list of words and signatures.

tasks/anagrams.exs

defmodule Dictionary do





@name __MODULE__





##



# External API





def start_link,



do: Agent.start_link(fn -> HashDict.new end, name: @name)





def add_words(words),



do: Agent.update(@name, &do_add_words(&1, words))





def anagrams_of(word),



do: Agent.get(@name, &Dict.get(&1, signature_of(word)))





##



# Internal implementation





defp do_add_words(dict, words),



do: Enum.reduce(words, dict, &add_one_word(&1, &2))





defp add_one_word(word, dict),



do: Dict.update(dict, signature_of(word), [word], &[word|&1])





defp signature_of(word),



do: word |> to_char_list |> Enum.sort |> to_string





end





defmodule WordlistLoader do



def load_from_files(file_names) do



file_names



|> Stream.map(fn name -> Task.async(fn -> load_task(name) end) end)



|> Enum.map(&Task.await/1)



end





defp load_task(file_name) do



File.stream!(file_name, [], :line)



|> Enum.map(&String.strip/1)



|> Dictionary.add_words



end



end





Our four wordlist files contain the following:

list1list2list3list4

angor

argon

caret

carte

cater

crate

creat

creta





ester

estre

goran

grano

groan

leapt

nagor

orang





palet

patel

pelta

petal

pleat

react

recta

reest





rogan

ronga

steer

stere

stree

terse

tsere

tepal





Let’s run it:

$ iex anagrams.exs



iex> Dictionary.start_link



iex> Enum.map(1..4, &"words/list#{&1}") |> WordlistLoader.load_from_files



iex> Dictionary.anagrams_of "organ"



["orang", "nagor", "groan", "grano", "goran", "argon", "angor"]





Making It Distributed


Because agents and tasks run as OTP servers, they can already be distributed. All we need to do is give our agent a globally accessible name. That’s a one-line change:

@name {:global, __MODULE__}





Now we’ll load our code into two separate nodes and connect them. (Remember that we have to specify names for the nodes so they can talk.)

Window #1





$ iex --sname one anagrams_dist.exs

iex(one@FasterAir)>





Window #2





$ iex --sname two anagrams_dist.exs

iex(two@FasterAir)> Node.connect :one@FasterAir

true

iex(two@FasterAir)> Node.list

[:one@FasterAir]





We’ll start the dictionary agent in node one—this is where the actual dictionary will end up. We’ll then load the dictionary using both nodes one and two:

Window #1





iex(one@FasterAir)> Dictionary.start_link

{:ok, #PID<0.68.0>}

iex(one@FasterAir)> WordlistLoader.load_from_files(~w{words/list1 words/list2})

[:ok, :ok]





Window #2





iex(two@FasterAir)> WordlistLoader.load_from_files(~w{words/list3 words/list4})

[:ok, :ok]





Finally, we’ll query the agent from both nodes:

Window #1





iex(one@FasterAir)> Dictionary.anagrams_of "argon"

["ronga", "rogan", "orang", "nagor", "groan", "grano", "goran", "argon",

"angor"]





Window #2





iex(two@FasterAir)> Dictionary.anagrams_of "crate"

["recta", "react", "creta", "creat", "crate", "cater", "carte",

"caret"]





Agents and Tasks, or GenServer?


When do you use agents and tasks, and when do you use a GenServer?

The answer is to use the simplest approach that works. Agents and tasks are great when you are dealing with very-specific background activities, whereas GenServers (as their name suggests) are more general.

You can eliminate the need to make a decision by wrapping your agents and tasks in modules, as we did in our anagram example. That way you can always switch from the agent or task implementation to the full-blown GenServer without affecting the rest of the code base.

It’s time to move on, and look at some advanced Elixir.





Part 3

More-Advanced Elixir



Among the joys of Elixir is that it laughs at the concept of “what you see is what you get.” Instead, you can extend it in many different ways. This allows you to add layers of abstraction to your code, which makes your code easier to work with.

This part covers macros (which let you extend the language’s syntax), protocols (which let you add behaviors to existing modules), and use (which lets you add capabilities to a module). We finish with a grab-bag chapter of miscellaneous Elixir tricks and tips.


